Project Gutenberg's The Flags of our Fighting Army, by Stanley C. Johnson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Flags of our Fighting Army
       Including standards, guidons, colours and drum banners

Author: Stanley C. Johnson

Release Date: March 24, 2018 [EBook #56830]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLAGS OF OUR FIGHTING ARMY ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                     THE FLAGS OF OUR FIGHTING ARMY


[Illustration:

  =1.= Second Troop of Horse Guards, 1687.
]

[Illustration:

  =2.= 5th Dragoon Guards, 1687.
]

[Illustration]

[Illustration:

  =3.= and =4.= 2nd Dragoon Guards, 1742.
]

[Illustration:

  =5.= General Grove’s Regiment (10th Foot), 1726.
]

[Illustration:

  =6.= 27th Inniskilling Regiment, 1747.
]

[Illustration:

  =7.= 103rd Regiment, 1780.
]

[Illustration:

  =8.= 14th Regiment (Second Battalion), 1812.
]

            PLATE 1. EARLY REGIMENTAL COLOURS AND STANDARDS




                               THE FLAGS
                          OF OUR FIGHTING ARMY
         INCLUDING STANDARDS, GUIDONS, COLOURS AND DRUM BANNERS


                         BY STANLEY C. JOHNSON,
                         M.A., D.Sc., F.R.E.S.
 Author of “The Medals of Our Fighting Men,” “Peeps at Postage Stamps,”
                                  etc.

                          WITH EIGHT FULL-PAGE
                          PLATES   IN   COLOUR


                          A. & C. BLACK, LTD.
                   4, 5 & 6 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W. 1




                             TO MY BROTHER
                                 IN THE
                       ROYAL GARRISON ARTILLERY.
                       A UNIT  OF  THE  ARMY  IN
                       WHICH THE  GUNS SERVE THE
                       PURPOSE   OF   REGIMENTAL
                               STANDARDS.


                            Published, 1918.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PREFACE


Very little has been written in the past dealing with the subject of the
standards, guidons, colours, etc., of the British Army. Scattered
amongst Regimental histories, biographies of illustrious soldiers, and
military periodicals, a fair amount of information may be discovered,
but it is, of necessity, disjointed and difficult of viewing in proper
perspective. Many years ago, a capital book was written by the late Mr.
S. M. Milne, entitled “Standards and Colours of the British Army.”
Unfortunately, this work was published privately and, accordingly, did
not receive the full measure of appreciation which it merited.

Students of Army Flags should consult this book whenever possible; also
“Ranks and Badges of the Army and Navy,” by Mr. O. L. Perry; and the
articles which appeared in _The Regiment_ during the latter weeks of
1916. Messrs. Gale & Polden’s folders dealing with Army Flags are also
instructive.

The author wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to Mr. Milne, Mr. O.
L. Perry, and the Editor of _The Regiment_. He is also very grateful for
the assistance extended to him by Lieutenant J. Harold Watkins and
Lieutenant C. H. Hastings, Officers in charge of the Canadian War
Records.




                                CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                           PAGE

        I.— INTRODUCTION                                               1

       II.— A HISTORY OF MILITARY COLOURS                              6

      III.— STANDARDS, GUIDONS AND DRUM BANNERS OF THE HOUSEHOLD      36
              CAVALRY, DRAGOON GUARDS AND CAVALRY OF THE LINE

       IV.— YEOMANRY GUIDONS AND DRUM BANNERS                         47

        V.— THE COLOURS OF THE FOOT GUARDS                            54

       VI.— THE COLOURS OF THE INFANTRY                               64

      VII.— COLOURS OF OUR OVERSEAS DOMINIONS                        115

     VIII.— MISCELLANEOUS COLOURS                                    121

       IX.— BATTLE HONOURS                                           124

 Appendix.— REGIMENTAL COLOURS OF CANADIAN INFANTRY BATTALIONS       139

      INDEX                                                          147




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
                               IN COLOUR


 1.—EARLY REGIMENTAL COLOURS AND STANDARDS               _Frontispiece._

                                                             FACING PAGE

 2.—CAVALRY STANDARDS, GUIDONS AND DRUM BANNERS                       36

 3.—COLOURS OF THE FOOT GUARDS                                        54

 4.—SAVING THE COLOURS OF THE BUFFS AT ALBUHERA                       68

 5.—COLOURS OF THE INFANTRY OF THE LINE (REGULAR                      80
   BATTALIONS)

 6.—REGIMENTAL COLOURS OF THE TERRITORIAL FORCE                       98

 7.—COLOUR PARTY OF THE 15TH SIKHS                                   116

 8.—MISCELLANEOUS GUIDONS AND COLOURS                                122

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE FLAGS OF OUR
                             FIGHTING ARMY.




                               CHAPTER I
                              INTRODUCTION


Ever since the time when the Romans went into battle, inspired by the
vexillum or labarum, military flags or colours have commanded a respect
bordering almost on the sacred. Our own history is crowded with
incidents which go to prove this contention. Who is there, for instance,
who has not heard of the gallant deeds of Melvill and Coghill, two
heroes who lost their lives in an endeavour to preserve the Queen’s
colour after the disastrous Zulu encounter at Isandlwana? Or let us take
the case of Lieutenant Anstruther, a youngster of eighteen, in the Welsh
Fusiliers. In defending the colour he carried up the treacherous heights
of the Alma, a shot laid him low, and eager hands snatched up the emblem
without a moment’s hesitation lest it should fall into the possession of
the enemy. No one thought of the danger which might overtake them whilst
guarding the cherished but conspicuous banner; all were resolved to
perish rather than it should be wrested from their grasp. And, let it be
said, five men won the Victoria Cross that day at the Alma for their
gallant defence of the colours. At the battle of Albuhera, in 1811, a
colour of the 3rd Buffs was carried by Ensign Thomas. The French
attacked in great force, and, surrounding Thomas, called upon him to
give up the silken banner. Thomas’s answer was discourteous, but to the
point; a moment later he lay dead, and the French bore away the flag
with triumph. To the credit of the Buffs, we must add that the emblem
was back in their possession before nightfall. These are just a few
cases in which men have been ready, and even eager, to make the great
sacrifice rather than lose their colours. They could be readily
multiplied a hundredfold.

Fortunately, we have now reached an age when valuable lives can be no
longer spent in defending military flags against the onslaughts of enemy
rivals, for, to-day, there is a rule in our army regulations which
forbids the taking of colours into the field of action. Before setting
out to meet the foe, they are placed in safe keeping, and the rites
which attend this ceremony partake of the utmost solemnity.

If military flags, which comprise the standards, guidons and drum
banners of the cavalry, and also the colours of the infantry, have been
reverenced in war, they are equally respected in peace time. They may
never be sent from place to place without a properly constituted escort,
which “will pay them the customary honours,” and an army regulation says
that “standards, guidons, and colours when uncased are, at all times, to
be saluted with the highest honours, viz., arms presented, trumpets or
bugles sounding the salute, drums beating a ruffle.” When new colours
are taken into service their reception is impressively conducted, and
the old ones are trooped before being cased and taken to the rear.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The following miscellaneous instructions are given in the King’s
Regulations with respect to military flags in general:—

  “Standards and guidons of cavalry will be carried by squadron
  serjeant-majors. Colours of infantry will be carried by two senior
  second-lieutenants, but on the line of march all subaltern officers
  will carry them in turn.

  “Standards, guidons and colours are not to be altered without the
  King’s special permission signified through the Army Council.

  “The consecration of colours will be performed by chaplains to the
  forces, acting chaplains, or officiating clergymen in accordance
  with an authorised Form of Prayer.

  “The standard of cavalry, or the King’s colour of battalions of
  infantry, is not to be carried by any guard or trooped, except in
  the case of a guard mounted over the King, the Queen, and Queen
  Mother, or any member of the Royal Family, or over a Viceroy, and is
  only to be used at guard mounting, or other ceremonials, when a
  member of the Royal Family or a Viceroy is present, and on occasions
  when the National Anthem is appointed to be played; at all other
  times it is to remain with the regiment. The King’s colour will be
  lowered to the King, the Queen, the Queen Mother, and members of the
  Royal Family, the Crown, and Viceroys only.”

Special regulations apply to the Brigade of Guards, as follows:—

  “The colours of the brigade will be lowered to His Majesty the King,
  Her Majesty the Queen, the Queen Mother, members of the Royal
  Family, the Crown, Foreign Crowned Heads, Presidents of Republican
  States, and members of Foreign Royal Families.

  “The King’s colour is never to be carried by any guard except that
  which mounts upon the person of His Majesty the King, or Her Majesty
  the Queen, or the Queen Mother.

  “The regimental colours will only be lowered to a field marshal, who
  is not a member of the Royal Family, when he is colonel of the
  regiment to which the colour belongs.

  “A battalion with uncased colours meeting the King’s Life Guards or
  King’s Guard, will pass on with sloped arms, paying the compliment
  ‘eyes right’ or ‘eyes left’ as required.

  “A battalion with cased colours or without colours, or a detachment,
  guard, or relief, meeting the King’s Life Guard or the King’s Guard
  with uncased standard or colour, will be ordered to halt, turn in
  the required direction, and present arms; but will pass on with
  sloped arms, paying the compliment of ‘eyes right’ or ‘eyes left’ as
  required, if the standard or colour of the King’s Life Guard or
  King’s Guard is cased.”

Two regulations which affect the whole of the Army may well be given in
conclusion:—

  “Officers or soldiers passing troops with uncased colours will
  salute the colours and the C.O. (if senior).

  “Officers, soldiers, and colours, passing a military funeral, will
  salute the body.”




                               CHAPTER II
                     A HISTORY OF MILITARY COLOURS


In the period 1633-1680, the first five infantry regiments, as we know
them to-day, were established, and this may be taken as a convenient
point from which to begin a study of the standards and colours of our
Army. Before this time the military forces of England and Scotland went
into battle with a full array of waving emblems, decorated with rampant
lions, powdered leopards, spread eagles, and other gaudily-painted
devices, but these were usually the symbols of the knights and patrons
who raised the forces. Such flags possessed much heraldic or
archæological interest, but few claims on the student of military lore,
and may be thus set aside with the reminder that, if knowledge of them
is required, it may be gained from such sources as the roll of
Karlaverok.

The first real military flags of which we have definite records were
those used in the Civil Wars. The cavalry possessed standards revealing
all manner of decorative symbols with mottoes telling of their leader’s
faith in God, their hatred for the enemy, and the trust which they
placed in Providence. The infantry forces bore colours devised with more
regularity of purpose. Each colonel flew a plain white, red or other
coloured flag; lieutenant-colonels were known by a flag bearing a small
St. George’s Cross in the upper left-hand canton; whilst other officers
possessed flags similar to those of the lieutenant-colonels but bearing
one, two, three, or more additional devices, according to rank, such
devices being lozenges, pile-wavys (i.e., tongues of flame), talbots,
etc., usually placed close up to the head of the staff.

At this period Scottish forces favoured flags bearing a large St.
Andrew’s Cross, in the upper triangle of which a Roman numeral was
placed to denote the owner’s rank.

In 1661, under the date of February 13th, what was probably the first
royal warrant to control regimental colours, was issued by the Earl of
Sandwich, Master of the Great Wardrobe. It ran:

  “Our Will and pleasure is, and we do hereby require you forthwith to
  cause to be made and provided, twelve colours or ensigns for our
  =Regiment of Foot Guards=, of white and red taffeta, of the usual
  largeness, with stands, heads, and tassels, each of which to have
  such distinctions of some of our Royal Badges, painted in oil, as
  our trusty and well-beloved servant, Sir Edward Walker, Knight,
  Garter Principal King-at-Arms, shall direct.”

This warrant is of much interest; it tells us that the early standards
were painted and not embroidered; that they were made of white or red
material—white was a sign of superiority, whilst red pointed to
extravagance, as it was more costly than blue, yellow, etc.; and it told
us that the Guards were to display the Royal badges, which they do to
this day. (All these badges are dealt with in a separate chapter.)

In later years, the small St. George’s Cross which, as we said above,
figured in the upper corner of the flag, gained more prominence and
filled the whole of the fabric. This may be considered the second period
in the history of regimental colours. The reader will readily see that
this change in English flags was brought about by contact with the
Scottish regiments which had flown for many years previously their
colours bearing large crosses of St. Andrew.

An interesting flag of this period is that of the =Coldstream Regiment=
(date about 1680). A drawing of it may be seen in the Royal Library at
Windsor Castle. The groundwork of blue taffeta is quite plain for the
colonel. The lieutenant-colonel’s banner is blue, with a large St.
George’s Cross, edged with white; whilst the major flew a similar
banner, to which was added a white pile-wavy issuing from the top
left-hand corner. The captains’ banners are like that of the major, but
bear a distinguishing Roman numeral to show seniority of rank.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In piecing together the history of the early Army flags, a certain
Nathan Brooks has given us much valuable assistance. He went to Putney
Heath on October 1st, 1684, to see the King review the troops, and was
wise enough to write down a description of the colours which figured in
the function. Probably no better account of the flags of this period is
still available. Here it is:—[1]

  “=The King’s Own Troop of Horse Guards and Troop of Grenadiers.=—The
  standard, crimson with the royal cypher and crown; the guidon,
  differenced only from the standard by being rounded and slit at the
  ends.

  “=The Queen’s Troop of His Majesty’s Horse Guards and Troop of
  Grenadiers.=—The standard and guidon as the King’s.

  “=The Duke’s Troop of His Majesty’s Horse Guards and Troop of
  Grenadiers.=—The standard and guidon of yellow damask, with His
  Royal Highness’s cypher and coronet.

  “=The Regiment of the Horse Guards= (now the Royal Horse Guards, the
  Blues), eight troops.—The standard of the King’s troop, crimson,
  with the imperial crown, embroidered; the colonel’s colour flies the
  royal cypher on crimson; the major’s, gold streams on crimson; the
  first troop, the rose crowned; the second, a thistle crowned; the
  third, the flower de luce, crowned; the fourth, the harp and crown;
  the fifth, the royal oak; all embroidered upon the crimson colours.

  “=The King’s Own Royal Regiment of Dragoons=, commanded by John,
  Lord Churchill.—The colours to each troop thus distinguished: the
  colonel’s, the royal cypher and crown embroidered upon crimson; the
  lieutenant-colonel’s, the rays of the sun, proper, crowned, issuing
  out of a cloud, proper, and is a badge of the Black Prince’s. The
  first troop has, for colours, the top of a beacon, crowned or, with
  flames of fire proper, and is a badge of Henry V. The second troop,
  two ostrich’s feathers crowned argent, a badge of Henry VI. The
  third, a rose and pomegranate impaled, leaves and stalk vert, a
  badge of Henry VIII. Fourth troop, a phœnix in flames, proper, a
  badge of Queen Elizabeth; each embroidered upon crimson.

  “=First Regiment of Foot Guards= (of twenty-four companies).—The
  King’s company, standard all crimson, cypher and crown embroidered
  in gold; the colonel’s white with the red cross (St. George’s), the
  crown or: the lieutenant-colonel’s, the same cross, with C.R.
  crowned or: the major’s, C.R. and crown, with a blaze crimson (i.e.,
  a flame issuing from the top left-hand corner of the flag); the
  first company, with the King’s crest, which is a lion passant
  guardant crowned or, standing on a crown. (Brooks then gives the
  remaining company badges which are set out in full later.)

  “=Colestream or Cauldstream Regiment of Foot Guards.=—This regiment
  flyes the St. George’s Cross, bordered with white in a blew field
  (cf. above).

  “=The Royal Regiment of Foot=, commanded by the Earl of Dumbarton,
  flyes a St. Andrew’s Cross, with a thistle and crown circumscribed
  in the centre, ‘Nemo me impune lacessit.’

  “=The Queen’s Regiment of Foot=, commanded by the Hon. Piercy Kirk,
  flyes a red cross bordered with white and rays as the admirals (see
  below), in a green field, with Her Majesty’s royal cypher in the
  centre.

  “=The Duke of Albany’s Maritime Regiment of Foot.=—The Admiral flyes
  the red cross, with rays of the sun issuing from each angle of the
  cross, or.

  “=The Holland Regiment of Foot= (afterwards the 3rd Buffs) flyes the
  red cross bordered white in a green field.

  “=Her Royal Highness, the Duchess of York and Albany’s Regiment of
  Foot= (4th King’s Own) flies a red cross in a yellow field, bordered
  white, with rays, as that of the Admiral’s, with H.R.Highness’s
  cypher in the centre.”

Having completed the quotation from Brooks, we are able to give an
extract from an old M.S., which is interesting when read in conjunction
with the above descriptions of Army flags:—

    “The imbroidered cypher and crowne on both sides Ye King’s owne
    colours, £3 . 10 . 0.

    “For painting and guilding ye other 23 colours and crownes on both
    sides one with another at 15s. a side, £34 . 10 . 0.”

Clearly this extract refers to the First Regiment of Foot Guards, and
shows that the King’s colours were embroidered, whilst the Company
colours were merely painted. Before this time, we know that most flags
were painted and, afterwards, that the tendency was for them to be
embroidered. It seems fair, then, to infer from this that when the King
reviewed his troops at Putney Heath, the period was one of transition
from painted to embroidered decoration.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Passing on to the reign of King James II., it seems that he evolved many
changes which were but little appreciated in the military quarters in
those days. An authority of the time, named Sandford, who wrote a book
entitled, “A History of the Coronation,” describes some of the Army
flags as follows:—

  “=1st or King’s Guards.=—The standard of the King’s Own Company was
  of crimson silk, embroidered in the centre with the royal cypher,
  J.R., ensigned with (i.e., having above it) an imperial crown in
  gold. The colonel’s, also of crimson silk, was not charged with any
  distinction or device. The lieutenant-colonel’s colour was of white
  silk with the cross of St. George throughout (i.e., covering the
  flag) of crimson silk, in the middle of which was painted an
  imperial crown in gold. The major’s colour was distinguished by a
  pile-wavy of crimson silk issuing out of the dexter chief of the
  first quarter (i.e., the corner of the flag nearest to the top of
  the staff), and an imperial crown of gold in the centre of the
  cross. The eldest captain’s colour was distinguished by one of the
  King’s cyphers, viz., J.R., interlaced, and an imperial crown
  painted in the middle of the cross, of gold; the second captain was
  differenced by two royal cyphers and crowns in the cross; the third,
  by three; the fourth, by four; and so on every captain to the
  twentieth who had his cross charged with twenty cyphers and crowns.
  And thus they appeared at James’s coronation.

  “=Coldstream Guards.=—His Majesty did then also direct that the
  alterations following should be made in the ensigns of this his
  second regiment of Foot Guards, that they might be more agreeable to
  the colours of the first regiment; for, excepting the colonel’s
  ensign, which was purely of white taffeta, the other eleven were
  charged with crosses of crimson taffeta throughout. The
  lieutenant-colonel’s, without distinction. The major’s had a
  pile-wavy. The cross of the eldest captain was charged on the centre
  with the figure I. in white, ensigned with an imperial crown of gold
  painted thereon; the second with II., the third with III., the
  fourth, IV., and so forward to the ninth captain who was
  distinguished by IX., each of them under an imperial crown of gold.
  And thus did these ensigns fly at the coronation.”

With the help of Sandford’s description, and a series of coloured
plates, which may be seen in the library at Windsor, we are able to get
a very correct impression of the Army colours of this period. Generally
speaking, they were remarkable for their brilliant colouring, their
fanciful fabric, their lack of similarity one with another, and their
show of private as opposed to royal badges. In this latter connection,
the colours of James showed a clear harking back to the pre-Reformation
days. Our first figure, on Plate I., reveals an attractive colour of the
period; it represents the standard of the Second Troop of Horse Guards,
date about 1687. The angels which support the large central crown were
taken from a popular French device, whilst the three small crowns placed
near the lower edge, refer to the King’s claim to the crowns of England,
Ireland and France. The central cypher, it may be well to point out, is
not F.R. but J.R. The second illustration reveals the Earl of
Shrewsbury’s rampant lion on a yellow field. There is a difference of
opinion as to whether the background should not be lightish buff, but
the Windsor plates certainly favour the colour as given in Fig. 2. The
flag is the colonel’s standard of Shrewsbury’s Regiment of Horse (now
the =5th Dragoon Guards=).

                  *       *       *       *       *

We have hinted that this was an era of much decoration, but to this rule
there is one outstanding exception—we refer to the =Scots Guards=. In
this case, the colonel’s colour was plain white, a favourite flag of
earlier times. The lieutenant-colonel’s was the national flag of
Scotland, a white St. Andrew’s Cross on a blue field. The major’s was
the same, but with a pile-wavy issuing from the upper corner of the
cross, and the captain’s as the lieutenant-colonel’s, but with a silver
numeral placed on the uppermost blue triangle. All were provided with
silver and blue tassels, and a silver spear surmounted the pole, emblems
which served to distinguish the flags of the Scots Guards from the
national flags which were current at that time.

                  *       *       *       *       *

From the end of the reign of James II. to 1707, when England and
Scotland formed a legislative union, we can trace but little in the
progress of military colours. The Union, however, came and left a very
clear impress on the banners of the time. Wherever the red cross of St.
George had been used, it was modified with the white cross of St.
Andrew, together with its distinctive blue triangular fields. As a rule,
the authorities favoured the use of small crosses, placed in the upper
canton, rather than large ones covering the whole fabric, for this
enabled a fairly big portion of the flag to be used for displaying the
arms of each particular military unit. A typical example of this period
is shown in Fig. 5. Here we have the colonel’s colour of General Grove’s
Regiment, afterwards the 10th Foot (now the =Lincolnshire Regiment=).
The talbot, the motto, and the ermine representations were all features
in the crest borne by General Grove. The date of this flag is 1726. Fig.
6, which shows the colours of the 27th or =Inniskilling Regiment=, is
also typical. Its date may be put down at about 1747.

The union did not appear on the infantry colours alone, during this
period; it also figured, but to a lesser extent, in the cavalry
standards, as may be noted from the following interesting quotation from
Milne.[2]

“Very little is known about cavalry standards from the time of James II.
until the middle of the next century; no drawings or evidence of any
kind seem forthcoming. One solitary specimen has been preserved,
however, and that of great interest, namely, the Dettingen standard of
the old 8th, subsequently 4th Horse (afterwards =7th Dragoon Guards=).

“A record of this regiment gives a very full and detailed account of its
bravery at Dettingen, under the command of its well-known colonel,
Major-General John Ligonier, who was created a knight-banneret on the
field of battle by the King (George II.) in person, and further proceeds
to relate that Cornet Richardson, carrying a standard, was surrounded by
the enemy and, refusing to surrender, received upwards of thirty sabre
cuts in his body and through his clothes. His standard and standard
lance were also damaged but he brought his precious charge out of
action.

“During the winter the standards, so much damaged in the battle as to be
unfit for use, were replaced by new ones from England, and each cornet
was presented with the one he had carried, as a testimony to his good
conduct. That presented to Cornet Richardson is still carefully
preserved by his descendant and representative.

“It is made of crimson silk brocade, about twenty-four inches square,
edged with gold and silver fringe, with a small union, three inches
square, in the upper corner; one side, the obverse, presents the crest
and motto of the colonel, General Ligonier (a demi lion issuing out of a
ducal coronet) with his motto, “Quo fata vocant,” on a scroll above; the
reverse gives his full coat of arms, crest, shield and motto, surrounded
with a handsome trophy of standards, trumpets, and implements of war,
all finely worked in gold embroidery.”

The feature of providing each side of the standard with a different
pattern, mentioned above, was unusual.

So far we have seen that with but one or two exceptions, no restrictions
were put upon the regimental authorities in designing their own colours.
Each unit was free to select its devices at will, and choose whatever
colouring seemed to fit its banners most. In 1743, however, a Royal
Warrant was issued which checked this freedom of design. It ran:—

  “The Union colour is the first stand of colours in all regiments,
  royal or not, except the Foot Guards. With them the King’s Standard
  is the first as a particular distinction.

  “No colonel to put his arms, crest, device, or livery in any part of
  the appointments of his regiment.

  “The first colour of every marching regiment of foot is to be the
  great Union; the second colour is to be the colour of the facing of
  the regiment, with the Union in the upper canton; except those
  regiments faced with white or red, whose second colour is to be the
  Red Cross of St. George, in a white field and a Union in the upper
  canton. In the centre of each colour is to be painted, in gold Roman
  figures, the number of the rank of the regiments, within a wreath of
  roses and thistles on one stalk, except those regiments which are
  allowed to wear royal devices or antient badges; the number of their
  rank is to be painted towards the upper corner. The length of the
  pike and colours to be the same size as those of the Foot Guards;
  the cord and tassels of all colours to be crimson and gold.

  “All the Royal Regiments, the Fusilier and the Marine Regiments, the
  Old Buffs, the 5th and 6th Regiments, the 8th or King’s Regiment,
  and the 27th or Inniskilling Regiment are distinguished by
  particular devices, and therefore, not subject to the preceding
  articles for colours.

  “The Standards and Guidons of the =Dragoon Guards=, and the
  Standards of the =Regimental Horse=, to be of Damask, embroidered
  and fringed with Gold or Silver. The Guidons of the Regiments of
  Dragoons to be of Silk. The Tassels and Cords of the whole to be of
  Crimson Silk and Gold mixed. The size of the Guidons and Standards,
  and the length of the Lance to be the same as those of the Horse and
  Horse Grenadier Guards.

  “The King’s or first Standard and Guidon of each Regiment to be
  Crimson, with the Rose and Thistle, conjoined, and Crown over them,
  in the Centre: His Majesty’s Motto, ‘Dieu et mon Droit,’ underneath.
  The White Horse in a Compartment in the first and fourth corners;
  and the Rank of the Regiment in Gold or Silver Characters on a
  Ground of the same Colour as the Facing of the Regiment in a
  Compartment in the second and third Corners.

  “The second and third Standard and Guidon of each Corps to be of the
  Colour of the Facing of the Regiment, with the Badge of the Regiment
  in the centre, or the Rank of the Regiment in Gold or Silver Roman
  characters, on a crimson ground, within a Wreath of Roses and
  Thistles on the same stalk, the Motto of the Regiment underneath.
  The White Horse, on a red ground to be in the first and fourth
  Compartments; and the Rose and Thistle conjoined upon a red Ground
  in the second and third Compartments. The distinction of the third
  Standard or Guidon to be a figure 3 on a circular ground of Red
  underneath the Motto. Those Corps which have any particular badge
  are to carry it in the centre of their second and third Standard or
  Guidon, with the Rank of the Regiment on a red ground within a small
  Wreath of Roses and Thistles in the second and third corner.”

This warrant is remarkable from the fact that it swept aside many
customs which had taken years, even centuries in some cases, to mature,
and instituted new ones which, with slight modifications, have remained
till to-day. The details set out for the Dragoon Guards are particularly
elaborate, so much so that few people seem to know just what to make of
them. Milne says that the Dragoon regulations did not come into use very
rapidly because they were not understood. To support this contention, he
quotes the following Annual Inspection Returns. “=1st Dragoon Guards.=
Shrewsbury, November 5th, 1750. The inspecting officer reports Standards
received in 1740, and in bad condition, the regiment waiting for a
pattern from His Royal Highness the Duke.” Again, =6th Dragoons=.
Ipswich, November 22nd, 1750: “Waiting for a pattern from His Royal
Highness the Duke.” Evidently, says Milne, it was found difficult to
work from the printed details, and there appears to have been delay in
settling the precise form the numerous badges should take until the
commander-in-chief had sanctioned a pattern standard. When the patterns
were decided upon they were practically identical to those in use
to-day, and far more elaborate than those they displaced, as a reference
to Figs. 3 and 4 will show. In these figures, two forms of the standard
of the 2nd Dragoon Guards of 1742 are given.

The 1743 warrant gave rise to much uncertainty, even outside the section
which referred to the Dragoon Guards, and, consequently, it is not
surprising to find that many official orders and “letters” were issued
giving advice and information telling how the various regulations were
to be carried out. One such document determined the measurements of the
Army Union flag, which were, of course, not those of the national Union
flag. The horizontal edge was given as 6 ft. 6 ins., the vertical edge,
6 ft. 2 ins.; the width of the St. George’s Cross, 1 ft. 1 in.; the
width of the white edging to the St. George’s Cross, 5 ins.; the width
of the St. Andrew’s Cross, 9 ins. (The diagonal red cross of St. Patrick
did not then form part of the Union). Also, the length of the pike was 9
ft. 10 ins.; the length of the cords with tassels, 3 ft.; each tassel
was 4 ins.; and the length of the spear-head of the pike, 4 ins.

The idea of controlling the regimental colours by the higher authorities
seems to have found favour and, as a result, further regulations were
issued in a supplementary warrant in 1747.[3] Colonel Napier, who was
responsible for this document, decided upon the following particulars:—

  =First Regiment or the Royal Regiment.=—In the centre of all their
  colours, the King’s Cipher[4] within the circle of St. Andrew and
  Crown over it; in the three corners of the second colour (i.e., the
  regimental colour), the Thistle and Crown. The distinction of the
  colours of the 2nd battalion is a flaming ray of gold descending
  from the upper corner of each colour towards the centre.

  =Second or the Queen’s Royal Regiment.=—In the centre of each
  colour, the Queen’s Cipher, on a red ground, within the Garter and
  Crown over it; in the three corners of the second colour the Lamb,
  being the ancient badge of the regiment.

  =Third Regiment or the Buffs.=—In the centre of both their colours,
  the Dragon, being their ancient badge, and the Rose and Crown in the
  three corners of their second colour.

  =Fourth, or the King’s Own Royal Regiment.=—In the centre of both
  their colours, the King’s Cipher on a red ground, within the Garter,
  and Crown over it; in the three corners of their second colour the
  Lion of England, being their ancient badge.

  =Fifth Regiment.=—In the centre of their two colours, St. George
  killing the Dragon, being their ancient badge, and in the three
  corners of their two colours, the Rose and Crown.

  =Sixth Regiment.=—In the centre of their two colours, the Antelope,
  being their ancient badge, and in the three corners of their second
  colour, the Rose and Crown.

  =Seventh, or the Royal Fusiliers.=—In the centre of their two
  colours, the Rose within the Garter and the Crown over it; the White
  Horse in the corners of the second colour.

  =Eighth, or the King’s Regiment.=—In the centre of both their
  colours, the White Horse on a red ground, within the Garter and
  Crown over it; in the three corners of the second colour the King’s
  Cipher and Crown.

  =Eighteenth Regiment or the Royal Irish.=—In the centre of both
  their colours, the Harp in a blue field, and the Crown over it, and
  in the three corners of their second colour, the Lion of Nassau—King
  William the Third’s arms.

  =Twenty-first, or the Royal North British Fusiliers.=—In the centre
  of their colours, the Thistle within the circle of St. Andrew and
  Crown over it, and in the three corners of the second colour, the
  King’s Cipher and Crown.

  =Twenty-third, or the Royal Welsh Fusiliers.=—In the centre of their
  colours, the device of the Prince of Wales, viz., three feathers
  issuing out of the Prince’s coronet; in the three corners of the
  second colour, the badges of Edward the Black Prince, viz., a Rising
  Sun, a Red Dragon, and the Three Feathers in the coronet; motto,
  “Ich Dien.”

  =Twenty-seventh, or the Inniskilling Regiment.=—Allowed to wear in
  the centre of their colours a Castle with three turrets, from the
  middle one of which flies a St. George’s Cross, all on a blue field,
  and the name ‘Inniskilling’ above. (See Fig. 6).

  =Forty-first Regiment, or the Invalids.=—In the centre of their
  colours, the Rose and Thistle, on a red ground, within the Garter; a
  Crown above. In the three corners of the second colour, the King’s
  Cipher and Crown.

Of the period beginning with the year 1751, Milne writes as follows:[5]
“An entirely new era is now being entered upon; a complete break has
taken place in the continuity of the colours of the British infantry;
the colonel’s and lieutenant-colonel’s flags have disappeared[6],
together with their gaudy and ever varying private armorial devices,
distinctive perhaps to the educated, but to the unlettered rank and file
emblematical of but little.

“In their place, boldly and resolutely stands the regimental number,
simple in form, easily recognised, easily remembered, forming a rallying
point in the minds of soldiers, which, as decade after decade passed
away, became indissolubly connected with some glorious deed, in its turn
becoming a matter of history, adding lustre to the regimental number,
and so, gradually, but surely, building up that wonderful _esprit de
corps_ which has stood the nation in good stead on so many occasions.

“Extremely plain at first, only the number within its flowery
surroundings, the flowers will be observed to become more ornate; tokens
of honour, the remembrance of some gallant action or campaign, added
from time to time, and ultimately the names of victories duly and
discreetly authorised to be emblazoned: and all surrounding and
centreing upon the old regimental number, ever enhancing its value in
the eyes of those who had the honour of serving under it.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The American War of Independence, as the reader may justly suppose,
marks another period in the history of military flags. In those days it
was customary, though not the immutable rule, to carry these emblems
into the line of battle, and as this period of fighting brought us many
reverses the effect on the colours was often disastrous. Many were taken
by the enemy, many more were worn to shreds, and a few were hidden and
lost. It is forgotten by some of us that American raiders infested our
shores and sank numbers of British vessels. The toll of ships led, at
times, to the loss of colours. Here is a case in point.

Report of an Inspection of the 81st Aberdeenshire Highlanders, at
Kinsale. “Colours wanting; were taken on passage from England to Ireland
by an American privateer. A new stand making in Dublin.”

As a result of all these happenings, many regiments will be found to
have had new colours at some time during the period 1776-83.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Continuing our history, we find that the next step to note concerns the
placing of battle honours on military flags. The first of these
distinctions was “Emsdorf,” and was given to the 15th Light Dragoons in
1768. Ten years later, the second distinction, “Gibraltar,” was awarded
to a quartette of regiments. It was the King’s appreciation of the
forces which withstood the fierce siege with “red-hot potatoes” under
the command of General Eliot, afterwards Lord Heathfield. The official
intimation of this grant is worth quoting _in extenso_.

  “April 28th, 1784. I seize the opportunity to acquaint you further
  that His Majesty has been graciously pleased in commemoration of the
  glorious defence made by those regiments which comprised the
  garrison of Gibraltar during the late memorable siege of that
  important fortress to permit the 12th, 39th, 56th, 58th Regiments
  which made a part of it, to have the word ‘Gibraltar’ placed upon
  their grenadier and light infantry caps, their accoutrements and
  drums, as likewise upon the second colour of each of those
  regiments, just underneath their respective numbers.

                                     “William Fawcett, Adjt.-General.”

It will be noticed that the distinction was to be fixed to the second or
regimental colour, and not to that of the King’s—a rule which holds till
this day, with but a few exceptions.

The Act of Union, which linked together the parliaments of England and
Ireland in 1801, had a considerable but obvious influence on the objects
of this study. Hardly was there a flag in the whole of the Army which
did not become obsolete by this union. Many of them were retired, and
fresh ones provided, but the general plan was to modify the existing
specimens. This was done by sewing red strips along the white limbs of
the St. Andrew’s Cross to provide for the St. Patrick’s Cross, and by
adding shamrocks to the wreath of leaves and flowers which encircled the
regimental badge. Milne says that the intrusion of the shamrock was in
all cases manifest, so that examples of this date may be recognised with
ease.

It is worth mentioning that colours are often modified or altered to
keep abreast with changing circumstances; new ones are not always
provided the moment they become obsolete in one or more small
particulars. The same writer from whom we just quoted describes the
changes which the standard of the =Coldstream Guards= underwent during a
period of some sixteen years. “When originally made, ... the central
garter star (i.e., the regimental badge) and the wreath richly
embroidered in gold bullion, but without the shamrock, and possibly the
crown, were all that appeared on the plain crimson silk ground. The
union with Ireland, 1801, necessitated the introduction of the shamrocks
... they have been squeezed into places when scarcely room could be
found for them. ‘Egypt’ and the ‘Sphinx’ having been authorised, they
would probably be added at the same time, ‘Egypt’ on a blue silk label,
immediately under the wreath, the ‘Sphinx’ within a laurel wreath of
gold embroidery, in all the four corners. The standard continued in this
state until 1814, when the honours, ‘Lincelles, Talavera, Barrosa,’ were
authorised to be used by the regiment. Consequently, they were added in
gold twist letters, on the crimson ground. Two more honours, ‘Peninsula
and Waterloo,’ were further authorised in 1815-16, and added soon after
on crimson silk (some trouble must have been occasioned in fitting the
two last into their places, so little room being left).”[7]

As time made the warrants of 1743 and 1747 more and more antiquated, we
find that regimental commanders took ever increasing liberties with the
regulations set down in those documents. To check such departures, a Mr.
George Naylor, the then York Herald, an appointment in the College of
Arms, was given the post of inspector of regimental colours in the year
1806. One of Mr. Naylor’s first actions was to issue a leaflet, which he
sent to every commanding officer, setting out certain rules of paramount
importance. The leaflet also gave a representation of both the King’s
and regimental colours, showing a blank central cartouche. This, he
intimated, was the standard pattern, and each commanding officer was
requested to fill in the details which were particular to his own flags
and return them for purposes of filing. The designs which came back to
Mr. Naylor clearly pointed to the lack of uniformity which had sprung up
in the preparation of colours. Many flags had been worked by ladies of
title who were patrons of the local unit, the daughters of the
commanding officers, and other such people, whose qualifications to
embroider were greater than their understanding of heraldry. To Mr.
Naylor, who knew what each flag should have borne, the designs must
frankly have been disappointing. In some cases, the Egyptian Sphinx
faced right instead of left; in others, it filled the space reserved for
the central badge; one instance is known where this device was used as
an ornament to cap the staff, and so heavily was it cast in silver that
those who carried it were “under the necessity of unscrewing it when the
regiment began to move”; a laurel wreath instead of the union wreath was
another substituted design. One of the filled-in designs returned to the
College of Arms showed a very dilapidated flag, but the covering letter
explained that, “the George and Dragon has nearly disappeared from our
King’s colour by a shell passing through it, though I trust his spirit
is left amongst us.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The period following on the peace which came with the victory of
Waterloo proved of great activity in the world of military colours. The
old flags had seen much active service and had become worn and torn,
some had been stripped from their supports in a moment of crisis and
hidden, whilst a few fell from the hands of their possessors and became
lost. Also, we must not forget that many new battle honours had been
recently won, and the fixing of these distinctions would always be an
unwise action when the flags were showing signs of wear. Accordingly,
the regiments which were provided with new stands at this time were
considerable.

The post-Waterloo period was marked by the disappearance of the central
heart-shaped shield (Figs. 7 and 8) in favour of a circle of red silk,
which was divided into a ring and an inner circle, the first for taking
the territorial designation of the regiment, and the second for showing
the regimental badge or number. (It should, perhaps, be stated that
royal regiments and those with higher numbers than seventy seldom
possessed territorial designations at this time.) The central circle and
ring of crimson have remained until this day. Roman gave place to Arabic
numerals, but the latter have since died out; the wreath became a little
more elaborate, for buds and extra leaves were introduced, and the
sphinx was definitely placed below the chief badge. A word must be said
respecting the battle honours; these were fixed in almost any position
and combination and no rules were followed, partly because the number of
honours varied with each regiment and partly because few regiments
possessed sufficient to work up into a universal pattern. Not many of
the banners of this time were painted, but, of course, the Foot Guards
formed a notable exception. When a line regiment flew a painted flag, it
was somewhat despised, and the inspection report was worded in a
condemning spirit. Here is an example: “Colours only three years in use,
much injured from the circumstance of the arms and ornaments being
painted.”

Another era of laxity sprang up about 1830. Colours issued at this time
displayed many departures from the general rules. Arabic numerals once
more found favour for denoting the regimental numbers, county titles
were often missing, the wreath became more fanciful, and in one case,
the Northumberland Fusiliers, the badge of St. George and the Dragon was
encircled by the union wreath, the central crimson circle being entirely
missing. Honours were commonly inscribed on the King’s colours, which
was decidedly wrong.

The swing of the pendulum came in 1844, for in that year an order issued
from the Horse Guards decreed that battle honours were not to figure on
the King’s or Queen’s colours, nothing was to be placed on them beyond
the regimental designation and the imperial crown. This decision, which
did not apply to the Foot Guards, as they have always been a law unto
themselves, was lamented by many people, as it robbed these colours of
much of their splendour. Milne thinks that the edict was issued because
battle honours were fast growing in number, and if many of these were
sewn on to a jack which was already a combination of seams and stitches
the results would be disastrous in partly worn specimens.

                  *       *       *       *       *

At this point we must go back to the years which followed Waterloo, to
discuss the standards of the Cavalry. The Hussar regiments had discarded
them completely, and most, if not all, of the Lancers had done the same.
No Hussars or Lancers possess them to-day, but, of course, their drum
banners serve to display their arms and appointments.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The shape of these flags received attention at this time. =The Life
Guards and Horse Guards= continued to fly square standards (there was an
exception in the case of The Blues, of which mention is made later).
=The Dragoon Guards= had favoured guidons from the date of their
inception in 1746, but were ordered to carry square standards in 1837.
=The Dragoons= continued to use the guidon-shaped banner which they
selected in the days of the Stuarts, and which they still carry. The
Light Dragoons only possessed banners, which were guidons, in three
instances.

A King’s regulation, dated June 1st, 1837, decreed that:—

  The Standards of the Dragoon Guards were “to be of silk damask
  embroidered and fringed with gold. The guidons of the regiments of
  Dragoons to be of silk. The flag of the standard to be 2 ft. 5 ins.
  wide without the fringe, and 2 ft. 3 ins. on the lance. The flag of
  the guidon of Dragoons to be 3 ft. 5 ins. to the end of the slit in
  the tail, and 2 ft. 3 ins. on the lance; the first or royal standard
  to be crimson, and the others of the colour of the facings as
  before.” These latter were of a curious oblong shape, with straight
  edges to the portions cut away in the fly.

Another official decree, dated August 18th, 1858, ran as follows:—

  “Her Majesty has been pleased to approve that regiments of Dragoon
  Guards henceforth carry but one standard or guidon, that the second,
  third and fourth standards or guidons at present in use be
  discontinued and that the authorised badges, devices, distinctions,
  and mottoes be, in future, borne on what is now called the Royal or
  first standard or guidon in the Dragoon Guards. N.B.—This not to
  apply to the Household troops, who carry one standard per squadron.”

This decree is a little difficult to understand as the third and fourth
standards had not been carried for many years prior to the issue of the
warrant. To-day, of course, these regiments possess but a single flag, a
combination of royal and regimental colour in one.

A standard which has received much prominence, and which forms an
unwelcomed exception to the rule that the Horse Guards fly square
standards (see p. 29) was presented to the Blues by William IV. in 1812,
at Windsor. We quote from a newspaper cutting:—

  “At 12 the King and Queen with their suite and an escort of the
  Third Dragoon Guards passed along the front of the line in open
  carriages and, having taken post in the centre, the guns fired and
  the troops saluted. The troops having been wheeled inwards, and the
  officers called to the front, Lord Hill placing himself before his
  regiment, their Majesties, accompanied by the Dukes of Cumberland
  and Gloucester, and Prince George of Cumberland, with the Duchess of
  Cumberland and Princess Augusta, taking their station in the centre,
  the standard, richly wrought in gold and emblazoned with the
  trophies of the Blues, was consecrated by the Chaplain to the
  Forces. After an address, in which the King recapitulated the motive
  of his gift, and the early origin and distinguished services of the
  Royal Horse Guards, His Majesty presented the standard to Lord Hill,
  who respectfully received it on the part of his regiment. The troops
  then resumed line, broke into column, and marched past in ordinary
  and quick time.”

This standard was guidon-shaped and of crimson silk; in the centre it
had the cypher of William IV., forward and reversed, interlaced,
surrounded by a number of battle honours, above which was the royal
crown. In the four corners were crowned emblems of the rose, thistle and
shamrock.

                  *       *       *       *       *

We are now drawing to the close of this historical sketch, but before
turning from the subject we must mark the year 1855. About this time the
union wreath on the colours of the infantry regiments assumed the style
as we now have it; the spear-head gave way for the lion and crown which
now adorns the pike-tops, whilst the cord and tassels were given a
definite style which has not been altered since.

About this time, also, a regulation was issued declaring that “The
regimental or second colour is to be the colour of the facing of the
regiment, with the Union in the upper canton, except those regiments
which are faced with red, white or black. In those regiments which are
faced red or white, the second colour is to be the red cross of St.
George in a white field, and the Union in the upper canton. In those
regiments which are faced with black, the second colour is to be the St.
George’s Cross: the Union in the upper canton, the three other cantons,
black.”

A more recent regulation has been framed which, in a measure, modifies
the one just quoted. We give it at length:—

  “=The Colours of the Infantry= are to be of silk, the dimensions to
  be 3 ft. 9 ins. flying, and 3 ft. deep on the pike, which, including
  the Royal Crest, to be 8 ft. 7½ ins., the cords and tassels to be
  crimson and gold mixed.

  “The Royal or First colour of every regiment (of infantry) is to be
  the Great Union, the Imperial colour of the United Kingdom of Great
  Britain and Ireland, in which the Cross of St. George is conjoined
  with the crosses of St. Andrew and St. Patrick, on a blue field. The
  first colour is to bear in the centre the territorial designation on
  a crimson circle with the Royal or other title within the whole,
  surmounted by the Imperial Crown.

  “The regimental or second colour is to be the colour of the facing
  of the regiment, except in those regiments which are faced with
  white, in which the second colour is to be the red cross of St.
  George in a white field, with the territorial designation of the
  Royal or other title displayed, as on the Royal or First colour,
  within the union-wreath of roses, thistles and shamrocks, ensigned
  with the Imperial crown.

  “The regimental or second colour of the First and Second battalions
  is to bear the ancient badges, devices, distinctions, and mottoes,
  which have been conferred by Royal authority. The third and fourth
  battalions[8] are to carry the same colours without such devices and
  distinctions as specially refer to actions or campaigns granted in
  commemoration of the services of the other two battalions. The
  number of each battalion, I., II., III., IV., is to be placed in the
  dexter cantons.

  “In those regiments which bear any ancient badge, the badge is to be
  on a red ground in the centre. The territorial designation, if
  practicable, to be inscribed on a circle within the union wreath of
  roses, thistles, and shamrocks, and the Royal or other title in an
  escroll underneath, the whole ensigned with the Imperial crown.

  “No additions to, or alterations in colours is to be made without
  the Sovereign’s special permission and authority, signified through
  the Commander-in-Chief of the Army.

  “Application for new colours is to be made to the Director of
  Clothing, in accordance with the instructions laid down in the Royal
  Warrant relating to clothing.”

=The Foot Guards=, which do not come under the heading of Infantry,
follow another set of regulations (see Chapter V.). Here it is of
interest to mention that, at one time, the authorities did everything in
their power to make them subject to the same regulations, but the Foot
Guards determined otherwise. Let us quote from Sir Frederick Hamilton’s
“History of the Grenadier Guards.” In September, 1859, when new colours
were about to be supplied to the Second Battalion Grenadier Guards, they
were given out from the Clothing Department, thus for the first time
treating the issue of Royal colours with about the same respect as is
accorded to the issue of a pair of regulation boots. Previous, however,
to delivery, Colonel F. W. Hamilton was requested to inspect them, when
he at once observed the substitution of the regimental for the Queen’s
colour and _vice versâ_. He also heard for the first time of the
proposal that the battalions should each select, _ad libitum_, one only
of the twenty-four Royal badges then belonging to them, and retain it as
their battalion badge, leaving the rest to fall into desuetude.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

As a result of this action, the Guards protested, as only Guards can,
against this attempt to rob them of their traditional customs. The
matter was laid before Queen Victoria, and in the month of October,
1859, she decided that “the crimson colour, as before, should be ‘the
Queen’s’ colour, and that the distinguished company badges, as hitherto
borne, should be retained, and emblazoned in rotation in the centre of
the Union or regimental colour. Excepting only the reduction in size,
and the addition of the proposed gold fringe, Her Majesty would wish no
further change to be made in the colours as hitherto borne by Her
Regiments of Guards. The service badges or names of actions in which the
regiments have distinguished themselves should be borne as hitherto-fore
on both colours.” This latter decree settled probably for all time the
designs of the colours of the Foot Guards.

We have now followed the growth of the military colours of the British
Army during the last two hundred and fifty years. In so long a period
and where so many different units are concerned, each having
peculiarities of its own, it is quite impossible to note every little
change and variation which has occurred, but the reader may be assured
that all the more important and interesting steps in the progress of
these emblems of British pluck and patriotism have received due notice.

-----

Footnote 1:

  Quoted from S. M. Milne.

Footnote 2:

  p. 63.

Footnote 3:

  Prepared in 1747, but issued in 1751.

Footnote 4:

  Napier’s spelling is adhered to.

Footnote 5:

  p. 105.

Footnote 6:

  Cf. the Foot Guards.

Footnote 7:

  A Certificate has been issued to each man serving in the Coldstreams
  during the War bearing the statement: “This is to inform the relatives
  and friends of —— that he has served his King and Country as a
  soldier, No. —— in the Coldstream Guards, during the Great European
  War.” The card is decorated with this colour and one of later date.
  The idea might well be followed by other regiments.

Footnote 8:

  Now that the number of battalions has been increased in each regiment
  it would, perhaps, be more accurate to make the division between
  Regular Battalions and Territorial Force Battalions.




                              CHAPTER III
 STANDARDS, GUIDONS AND DRUM BANNERS OF THE HOUSEHOLD CAVALRY, DRAGOON
                    GUARDS, AND CAVALRY OF THE LINE


Among the grandest and most attractive flags which are flown in any part
of the world, those of the British Cavalry must be assigned a high
position, for, without being gaudy, they are beautiful, elaborate, gaily
coloured and full of historic detail. The reader is invited to turn to
the second plate, and examine the five examples given thereon. He will
see that the badges—the relics of the old baronial days—are steeped in
historical fact and military tradition, that the battle honours are
reminiscent of the glorious fights of other days; and that the reds and
blues and greens are judiciously blended without offending the eye.

Cavalry flags are known as standards when they are square and guidons
when swallow-tailed. The Household Cavalry and the Dragoon Guards
possess standards and the Dragoons fly guidons. To the student of
military emblems, it is somewhat disappointing to find that Hussars and
Lancers have no flags with which to display their splendid traditions.
In their case, we must be content to examine the cloths or banners hung
around their drums. Before taking each regiment separately, it may be
useful to state that a standard, without the red and gold fringe,
measures 2 ft. 6 ins. by 2 ft. 3 ins.; a guidon, 3 ft. 5 ins. by 2 ft. 3
ins.; and the lance of either is 8 ft. 6 ins. long.

[Illustration:

  =9.= Regimental Standard of the 2nd Life Guards.
]

[Illustration:

  =10.= Standard of the 1st (King’s) Dragoon Guards.
]

[Illustration:

  =11.= Standard of the 3rd (Prince of Wales’s) Dragoon Guards.
]

[Illustration:

  =12.= Drum banner of the 17th (Duke of Cambridge’s Own) Lancers.
]

[Illustration:

  =13.= Drum banner of the 5th (Royal Irish) Lancers.
]

[Illustration:

  =14.= Drum banner of the 13th Hussars.
]

[Illustration:

  =15.= Guidon of the 2nd Dragoons (Royal Scots Greys).
]

[Illustration:

  =16.= Guidon of the 6th (Inniskilling) Dragoons.
]

          PLATE 2. CAVALRY STANDARDS, GUIDONS AND DRUM BANNERS

  =1st Life Guards.=—The King’s Standard is crimson and bears a fairly
  large representation of the Royal Arms. The King’s Cypher figures in
  the two upper corners. Below the Arms are placed the battle honours:
  Dettingen; Peninsula; Waterloo; Egypt, 1882; Tel-el-Kebir; South
  Africa, 1899-1900; Relief of Kimberley; Paardeberg.

  Three other standards are carried, each very similar to the above,
  the central device being the chief point of difference. (See Fig.
  9.)

  =2nd Life Guards.=—As for the 1st Life Guards, with slight technical
  differences. (See Fig. 9.)

  =Royal Horse Guards= (The Blues).—As for the 1st Life Guards with
  slight technical differences. With this regiment the battle honours
  are: Dettingen; Warburg; Beaumont; Willems; Peninsula; Waterloo;
  Egypt, 1882; Tel-el-Kebir; South Africa, 1899-1900; Relief of
  Kimberley; Paardeberg.

  The Standard of Honour, in reality a guidon, which was presented by
  William IV. (described elsewhere) must be mentioned here.

  =1st King’s Dragoon Guards.=—This standard of crimson silk damask
  bears in the centre the Royal Cypher within the Garter, and ensigned
  with the imperial crown. Around this is placed the union wreath
  bearing roses, shamrocks, and thistles growing upon the same stalk.
  In the four corners are placed small oval labels; the first and
  fourth revealing the White Horse of Hanover, on a green mount, the
  background of the horse is red; the second and third being devoted
  to the regimental initials I. K.D.G., on a blue ground. Along the
  vertical edges of the standard are placed a number of golden labels,
  each bearing one of the following battle honours: Blenheim;
  Ramillies; Oudenarde; Malplaquet; Dettingen; Warburg; Beaumont;
  Waterloo; Sevastopol; Taku Forts; Pekin; South Africa, 1879. Below
  the union wreath is placed a label inscribed: South Africa, 1901-02.
  This flag is given in Fig. 10.

  The White Horse is shown in order to recall the part which this
  regiment took in suppressing the Jacobite Rebellions during the
  reigns of George I. and II.

  =2nd Dragoon Guards (Queen’s Bays).=—This standard closely follows
  the design of the 1st (King’s) Dragoon Guards. The centre, however,
  is filled with the cypher of Queen Caroline, within the Garter. The
  first and fourth corners contain the White Horse, while the second
  and third bear the initials II. D.G., on a buff ground. The battle
  honours are: Warburg; Willems; Lucknow; South Africa, 1901-02.

  =3rd (Prince of Wales’s) Dragoon Guards.=—The Dragoon Guard type of
  standard is followed in this case. The central badge is the Plume of
  the Prince of Wales. The first and fourth corners reveal the White
  Horse, as above; the second corner contains a small picture of the
  Rising Sun, and the third, a small Red Dragon. (All these three
  devices are the appropriation of the Prince of Wales.) The battle
  honours are: Blenheim; Ramillies; Oudenarde; Malplaquet; Warburg;
  Beaumont; Willems; Talavera; Albuhera; Vittoria; Peninsula;
  Abyssinia; South Africa, 1901-02. (Fig. 11.)

  =4th (Royal Irish) Dragoon Guards.=—The Dragoon Guard type of
  standard is again followed. The central badge contains the Harp and
  Crown, and the Star of the Order of St. Patrick; the second and
  third corners are filled with the initials IV. D.G. on a blue
  ground, and the battle honours are: Peninsula; Balaklava;
  Sevastopol; Egypt, 1882; Tel-el-Kebir. The motto, “Quis separabit,”
  is inscribed below the union wreath.

  =5th (Princess Charlotte of Wales’s) Dragoon Guards.=—This standard
  follows the type for the Dragoon Guards. The central badge is merely
  the regimental designation, V. D.G. The four corners contain the
  White Horse and the Rose, Thistle and Shamrock on one stalk. The
  battle honours are: Blenheim; Ramillies; Oudenarde; Malplaquet;
  Beaumont; Salamanca; Vittoria; Toulouse; Peninsula; Balaklava;
  Sevastopol; South Africa, 1899-1902; Defence of Ladysmith. The motto
  of John Hampden, “Vestigia nulla retrorsum” (No going backwards),
  appears below the union wreath.

  =6th Dragoon Guards (Carabiniers).=—This standard follows the type
  for the Dragoon Guards. The central badge is VI. D.G. The second and
  third corners have white labels also bearing the inscription VI.
  D.G. The battle honours are: Blenheim; Ramillies; Oudenarde;
  Malplaquet; Warburg; Willems; Sevastopol; Delhi, 1857; Afghanistan,
  1879-80; South Africa, 1899-1902; Relief of Kimberley; Paardeberg.

  =7th (Princess Royal’s) Dragoon Guards.=—The type as before. In the
  centre, the coronet of her late Majesty, the Empress and Queen
  Frederick of Germany and Prussia as Princess Royal of Great Britain
  and Ireland. As the facings are black, the letters VII. P.R.D.G.
  appear on a groundwork of this colour in the second and third
  corners. The battle honours are: Blenheim; Ramillies; Oudenarde;
  Malplaquet; Dettingen; Warburg; South Africa, 1846-7; Egypt, 1882;
  Tel-el-Kebir; South Africa, 1900-02.

  =1st (Royal) Dragoons.=—A guidon of crimson silk, bearing in its
  centre the crest of England, within the Garter, is the flag of this
  regiment. The imperial crown ensigns the badge and the union wreath
  encircles it. The four corners contain small labels, as was the case
  with all the Dragoon Guard standards; the first and fourth are
  embellished with the White Horse, and the second and third with the
  initials I.D. on a blue ground. Below the union wreath is the motto,
  “Spectemur agendo” (Judge us by our deeds), and below this is a
  silver eagle, a replica of the one taken from the 105th Regiment of
  French Infantry at Waterloo. The battle honours are: Tangier,
  1662-80; Dettingen; Warburg; Beaumont; Willems; Fuentes d’Onor;
  Peninsula; Waterloo; Balaklava; Sevastopol; South Africa, 1899-1902;
  Relief of Ladysmith.

  =2nd Dragoons (Royal Scots Greys).=—A guidon as for the 1st
  Dragoons, but with the following badge: A thistle within the circle,
  and the motto of the Order of the Thistle, “Second to None,” below
  the circle. The second and third corners contain a blue label with
  the inscription II.D. The battle honours are: Blenheim; Ramillies;
  Oudenarde; Malplaquet; Dettingen; Warburg; Willems; Waterloo;
  Balaklava; Sevastopol; South Africa, 1899-1902; Relief of Kimberley;
  Paardeberg. The French eagle is placed below the motto. (Fig. 15.)

  3rd (King’s Own) Hussars, 4th (Queen’s Own) Hussars, 5th (Royal
  Irish) Lancers—no guidons.

  =6th (Inniskilling) Dragoons.=—A guidon as for the 1st Dragoons, but
  with the following badge: The castle of Inniskilling, flying the St.
  George’s Cross, and the word “Inniskilling” underneath. The second
  and third corners contain a primrose-coloured label with the
  inscription VI.D. The battle honours are: Dettingen; Warburg;
  Willems; Waterloo; Balaklava; Sevastopol; South Africa, 1899-1902.
  (Fig. 16.)

  7th (Queen’s Own) Hussars, 8th (King’s Royal Irish) Hussars, 9th
  (Queen’s Royal) Lancers, 10th (Prince of Wales’s Own Royal) Hussars,
  11th (Prince Albert’s Own) Hussars, 12th (Prince of Wales’s Royal)
  Lancers, 13th Hussars, 14th (King’s) Hussars, 15th (The King’s)
  Hussars, 16th (The Queen’s) Lancers, 17th (Duke of Cambridge’s Own)
  Lancers, 18th (Queen Mary’s Own) Hussars, 19th (Queen Alexandra’s
  Own Royal) Hussars, 20th Hussars, 21st (Empress of India’s)
  Lancers—none of these regiments fly guidons.

Almost as attractive as the standards and guidons are the drum banners,
or drum cloths, of the cavalry. These appointments are usually made of
brilliant coloured fabric, richly embroidered in gold, and bear the
devices and, at times, the battle honours peculiar to each regiment. To
our minds, it is unfortunate that the material chosen in making them
does not always correspond with the facings of the unit. Hussars and
Lancers, it is pleasing to know, have not been deprived of these banners
or cloths.

The three sister regiments of =Life Guards= and =Horse Guards= have
chosen very similar drum banners. They are crimson, and bear the Royal
Arms, with two flying cherubs placed above. Gold embroidery enters
largely into the decoration of these fine emblems. No battle honours are
shown. =The 1st Dragoon Guards= carry a blue banner, richly embroidered,
with the Royal Arms. =The 2nd Dragoon Guards= display their nickname,
“Bays,” within a golden wreath, surmounted by an imperial crown, all on
a cream-buff ground. The motto, “Pro Rege et Patria” (For King and
Country), is inscribed on a red scroll. =The 3rd Dragoon Guards= have
selected a banner of the same colour as their facings, namely, yellow.
The Prince of Wales’s plume, the motto, “Ich Dien” (I serve), the White
Horse, the Rising Sun, the Red Dragon of Cadwallader, and a union wreath
all appear on this fine cloth. =The 4th Dragoon Guards= carry a blue
banner bearing the Harp and Crown and the Star of the Order of St.
Patrick, emblems showing the Irish origin of the regiment. The White
Horse and a union wreath also enter into the scheme of decoration. =The
5th Dragoon Guards= display the White Horse, the regimental initials V.
D.G., and the title, “Princess Charlotte of Wales,” on a blue scroll,
all on a crimson cloth; (the facings are dark green). =The 6th Dragoon
Guards= have a semi-circular banner of white material, tastefully
decorated with a number of blue labels and a gold wreath encircling the
regimental badge—a shield supported by a pair of crossed carbines,
surmounted by an imperial crown. =The 7th Dragoon Guards= carry a neat
blue banner decorated with the Royal Arms, a golden wreath and a scroll
inscribed “The Princess Royal’s Dragoon Guards.” Turning now to the =1st
Royal Dragoons=, we have a dark blue cloth bearing, in gold, the Crest
of England within the Garter, the Eagle, of which we spoke, a wreath of
oak and laurel, the motto “Spectemur agendo,” and the regimental title.
=The 2nd Dragoons=, the Scots Greys, show a light crimson banner, having
in the centre the Thistle, around which is inscribed the motto, “Nemo me
impune lacessit” (No one hurts me with impunity). The French Eagle, two
flaming grenades, a wreath of golden thistles, and the motto, “Second to
none,” are also given. =The 3rd (King’s Own) Hussars= have silver
decorated drums, and possess no drum cloths. =The 4th Hussars= have the
Royal Arms and a number of battle honours on their yellow banner. =The
5th Lancers= own a neat green cloth which bears the Harp and Crown, the
motto, “Quis separabit” (Who shall separate?), a golden-brown wreath,
two crossed lances, and a scroll inscribed with the words, “Fifth Royal
Irish.” No battle honours appear. This cloth is shown in Fig. 13. =The
6th Dragoons= reveal their connection with Inniskilling by using the
castle as a badge. A golden wreath and the imperial crown are also
given, all on a yellow background. =The 7th Hussars= possess a dark blue
banner, ornamented with the monogram Q.O. (i.e., Queen’s Own) interlaced
within a garter, and surmounted by a crown. Battle honours are given on
light blue scrolls. =The 8th Irish Hussars= display the harp and crown,
a number of battle honours, and the regimental initials 8.K.R.I.H.
(King’s Royal Irish Hussars) on a brownish-red cloth. The motto,
“Pristinæ virtutis memores” (The memory of former valour), is given on a
blue scroll. One of the most attractive designs is that used by =the 9th
Lancers=. The cypher of Queen Adelaide, reversed and interlaced, within
a garter, is surmounted by an imperial crown, and backed by a pair of
crossed lances. The numerous battle honours are given in a circular
ring, whilst the figures IX. are placed below the ring. The cloth is
crimson. =The 10th Hussars= have the alternative title of the Prince of
Wales’s Own. Their banner, accordingly, bears the Prince’s plume and
motto. The honours are woven into a golden wreath which encircles the
Rising Sun and Cadwallader’s Red Dragon. The material is royal blue.
=The 11th Hussars= display the late Prince Consort’s crest and motto,
“Treu und fest” (True and firm), the Egyptian Sphinx, the regimental
initials, XI.H., all surmounted by a crown, and the inscription, “Prince
Albert’s Own Hussars.” The cloth is crimson. =The 12th Lancers= also
have a crimson banner, embellished by the plume of the Prince of Wales,
the Egyptian Sphinx, the regimental number XII., a golden wreath, and a
pair of crossed lances. =The 13th Hussars= wear the royal cypher
enwreathed with leaves of laurel and oak, the imperial crown, and the
usual array of battle honours. The motto, “Viret in Æternum” (Virile for
ever), figures on this cream-buff banner. (Fig. 14). =The 14th Hussars=,
being known as the 14th King’s Light Dragoons, bear this title on a
golden scroll, which is placed above the royal crest within the Garter.
The battle honours are inscribed upon the leaves of a laurel wreath. The
cloth is crimson. Of the same colour is the drum banner of =the 15th
Hussars=. This regiment displays the royal crest, the King’s cypher, the
figures XV., the battle honours, and a golden wreath of laurel and oak.
A royal blue cloth is carried by =the 16th Lancers=; it bears the
crossed lances, which figure on all Lancer drum cloths, except those of
=the 17th Lancers=. In this case, the well-known device of a skull and
crossbones is placed within a garter, surmounted by a crown and
enwreathed with a band of oak and laurel leaves. The cloth is deep blue.
(Fig. 12.) =The 18th Hussars= are known by their deep crimson banner,
bearing, among the battle honours, the inscriptions, XVIII. Hussars,
Queen Mary’s Own, and the motto, “Pro rege, pro lege, pro patria
conamur” (For king, for law, for country we strive). =The 19th Hussars=
have a white cloth, showing the letter A, interlaced with the
Dannebrog,[9] below which is the White Elephant of Assaye, and around it
a number of labels bearing battle honours, and the inscription, Queen
Alexandra’s Own Royal Hussars. =The 20th Hussars= favour a crimson
banner, which is embellished by a large golden wreath from which are
growing roses, thistles and shamrocks. The royal cypher and the imperial
crown are given the central position. The last cavalry regiment, =the
21st (Empress of India’s) Lancers=, owns probably the most fanciful drum
banner. The letters V.R.I. are cleverly interlaced and supported by a
pair of crossed lances, the whole encircled by a union wreath and the
imperial crown. “Khartoum” is inscribed upon a dark blue scroll. The
banner is French grey.

-----

Footnote 9:

  Refer to description of Alexandra, Princess of Wales’s Own (Yorkshire
  Regiment).




                               CHAPTER IV
                   YEOMANRY GUIDONS AND DRUM BANNERS


Following on the Cavalry, in the Army List, comes the Yeomanry, which
forms part of the Territorial Force. This unit of the Army is divided
into Dragoon, Hussar and Lancer divisions, an example of each being the
Westminster Dragoons, the Royal Gloucestershire Hussars, and the City of
London Rough Eiders. The Dragoons, as a rule, are the only section which
carry flags—in all cases they are guidons—but it must be mentioned that
some Dragoon regiments display no colours, whilst a certain few of the
other divisions possess these emblems, though they may not have received
official recognition. Most regiments own drum cloths, but some of those
raised since the Boer War carry no drums and, in consequence, wear no
drum cloths. In one or two instances, i.e., in the North Somerset
Yeomanry, ornamental drums are provided which need no cloth
embellishments.

Yeomanry guidons are made of crimson material, edged with gold and red
fringe; the pole is surmounted with the Royal lion and crown; and, in
most cases, the distinctive badge is ensigned with the Royal crown, and
encircled by the union wreath. The only battle honour inscribed on these
flags is “South Africa,” but all regiments do not possess it.

=The Berks Yeomanry=, which has its headquarters at Hungerford, flies
the standard pattern of guidon, with a White Horse as central badge.
This animal, as revealed on the banner, is a very poor specimen, but as
it is an imitation of the one cut in the turf on the downs, we can
appreciate the reason for its adoption.

=The Derbyshire Yeomanry= has the united red and white rose for its
badge. This flower is ensigned with the imperial crown and, therefore,
the ordinary crown is not placed above and outside the circular label,
as is usual.

=The Essex Yeomanry= boasts of a motto: “Decus et Tutamen” (Honour and
safety), which is inscribed on a scroll placed under the badge,
consisting of a red escutcheon charged with three seaxes. These weapons
are reminders of the county’s connections with bygone Saxon occupation.
(Fig. 41.)

=The Fife and Forfar Regiment=, which hails from Cupar, is proud of its
badge, a representation of the Thane of Fife. Readers of Macbeth will
remember that Macduff was a descendant of the original Thane of Fife, a
fine soldier who obtained a grant of the shire of Fife from Kenneth II.
in recognition of his assistance when fighting against the Picts.

=The Hampshire Carabiniers= have the appropriate device of two carbines
in saltire. They also have a rose at each corner of the guidon, white in
the first and fourth corners and red in the second and third.

=The Herts Yeomanry= have a stag for device, whilst =the Lanarkshire
Yeomanry=, a regiment possessing the alternative lengthy title of
“Queen’s Own Royal Glasgow and Lower Ward of Lanarkshire,” flies a flag
of the ordinary type revealing no particular badge.

=The Duke of Lancaster’s Own= bear the appropriate red rose of the House
of Lancaster, and here we may mention that =the Yorkshire Dragoons
Yeomanry= (Queen’s Own) display the white rose of York.

=Lothians and Border Horse Yeomanry= show a garb which, in non-heraldic
terms, is a shock of corn.

=The Montgomeryshire Yeomanry= use a red dragon with green wings as the
central badge, which is surrounded by a union wreath not of the
regulation design.

=The Norfolk Yeomanry= has broken away from the traditional pattern of
guidon. In each of the four comers is the Royal Cypher ensigned with the
imperial crown, and in the centre are the Royal Arms. The Royal
residence in Norfolk, and the King’s special interest in this county
probably account for the presence of these emblems.

=The Scottish Horse= display the cross of St. Andrew on a blue
groundwork, as the central badge, whilst in the four corners is the
thistle ensigned with the imperial crown. This is one of the most
pleasing guidons of the Yeomanry Force.

=The Shropshire Yeomanry= have as the central badge on their guidon a
rendering of the arms of the Shropshire County Council (i.e., three
tigers’ heads).

=The Sussex Yeomanry= display a badge comprising six martlets perched in
three rows, all on a Blue background, whilst =the Northamptonshire
Yeomanry= give another rendering of the well-known white horse.

=The Westminster Dragoons=, otherwise known as the 2nd County of London
Yeomanry, have the Royal Cypher and Crown as central badge, whilst in
the first and fourth corners are crossed axes, and in the second and
third, Beaufort’s portcullis. These four devices are encircled by a
union wreath of special design. (Fig. 42.)

If we leave the Yeomanry guidons, and turn to the drum banners, a more
interesting set of emblems will be brought to our notice. The guidons
may be accused of possessing a somewhat monotonous semblance one with
the other, but this is not a characteristic of the drum cloths. They are
gay-coloured, smart in appearance, and endowed with emblematic
ornamentation of an interesting nature.

=The Ayreshires= have a neat crimson cloth, showing a crown, a union
wreath, and scrolls bearing the inscription, “The Earl of Carrick’s Own
Ayreshire Yeomanry Cavalry.” =The Berks’= drum cloth is of the same
colour, while the ornamentation consists of the initials R.B.Y.C. in
writing, with the imperial crown above, and a crescent and star below.
Another crimson cloth is that of =the Cheshires=, which displays the
plume of the Prince of Wales as central badge. =The Derbyshire Yeomanry=
use the red and white rose as on the guidon, but it is worked in gold
threads on a crimson cloth. =The Royal 1st Devon= and the =Royal North
Devon= both bear the Royal Cypher, ensigned with the imperial crown on a
crimson groundwork. The former, however, has gold fringe, but the
latter, silver-white and blue. =The Dorsets= display the same royal
emblems within a silver laurel wreath, also on crimson. =The Hampshires=
have an elaborate blue cloth, with wide gold fringe, on which appears
carbines in saltire, the imperial crown, the red and white rose and a
union wreath. =The West Kent’s= is crimson, and bears the white county
horse within the garter, surmounted by an imperial crown. The motto,
“Invicta” (Unconquered), and the inscription “West Kent Yeomanry,” are
woven into a laurel wreath. A blue cloth is used by the =Lanarkshire
(Queen’s Own) Yeomanry=. The design is neat, fairly simple, and consists
of the Royal Cypher, within a garter, ensigned by the imperial crown,
and surrounded by a wreath of thistles. =The Lancashire Hussars= also
carry a crimson banner; it bears the Royal Cypher, interlaced,
surmounted by the imperial crown, and has below it the Lancastrian rose.
A wreath of red roses encircles these devices. =The Duke of Lancaster’s
Own= is a dark blue fabric having, as central badge, the three lions of
England on a shield surcharged with a white label or bar having three
points. The imperial crown also appears, and the whole is framed by a
laurel and oak wreath. The red rose ensigned by a crown figures in the
two lower corners. =The City of London Rough Riders= have an attractive
purple banner bearing the City arms within a circle and a wreath. =The
1st County of London=, better known as the Duke of Cambridge’s Hussars,
favours a green cloth, having, as central badge, a seven-pointed crowned
star, within a wreath. The Duke’s cypher appears in the four corners,
and the regimental motto, “Pro aris et focis,” is given on the star.
Another green banner is that of the =3rd County of London
Sharpshooters=. This appointment is ornamented with a pair of crossed
rifles and a crown within a circle, ensigned with the imperial crown and
framed by a wreath of laurel. =Lothians and Border Horse Yeomanry= have
a blue banner, revealing the garb, before mentioned, and a wreath of
thistles. =The Montgomeryshire Yeomanry= display a crimson cloth
embellished, in the centre, by a rose, thistle, and shamrock springing
from a single stalk. (Cf. the regimental standard of the 2nd Life
Guards, Fig. 9). In the first and fourth corners is the White Horse of
Hanover, and in the second and third corners, the Red Dragon of Wales.
=The Northumberland Hussars= display a blue cloth in the centre of which
figures the regimental cypher, with a crown above. On a scroll appears
the name of the regiment, and two sprays of golden laurel complete the
ornamentation. A banner of mantua-purple cloth belongs to =the
Oxfordshire Yeomanry=. It bears the regimental cypher and a laurel
wreath, both in silver, an imperial crown, in gold, and three red
scrolls, inscribed, “Queen’s Own Oxfordshire Hussars.” =The Shropshire
Yeomanry= drum cloth carries the same device as the guidon, but it is
blue, and has the motto, “Floreat Salopia” (Flourish Shropshire). The
well-known Stafford knot, which has belonged to the heads of the
Stafford family from earliest times, appears as the central badge on the
blue drum cloth of =the Staffordshire Yeomanry=. The fringe of this
banner is unusual, being for the most part, triangles of gold and silver
embroidery. =The Suffolk Yeomanry= uses a green cloth, in the centre of
which figures the castle and key, and the date 1793, devices to remind
us of the siege of Gibraltar. A golden laurel wreath is also given, as
well as the motto, “Liberty, property, loyalty.” This is a very fine
appointment. =The Royal Wiltshires=, having the alternative title of
“Prince of Wales’s Own,” naturally reveals the plume of the Prince. This
is shown in a garter, which is surmounted by the Royal lion and crown;
all on a crimson cloth. =The Yorkshire Dragoons= and =the Yorkshire
Hussars= must not be confused. The first has a blue cloth bearing the
white rose and the title, “Queen’s Own,” whilst the second displays a
deep scarlet, almost black, drum banner, with the white rose, the plume
of the Prince of Wales, and the title “Princess of Wales’s Own.”

In our limited space it has only been possible to give the chief
features of these drum banners—sufficient, however, to assist the reader
in recognising the appointments. They are, we must add, of the utmost
beauty, and equal in point of interest to those of the regular Cavalry.




                               CHAPTER V
                     THE COLOURS OF THE FOOT GUARDS


Tradition has perhaps a stronger hold in the Foot Guards than in any of
the Infantry units dealt with in the chapter which follows. Accordingly,
the reader must not be surprised to find that most of the general rules
which affect the colours of the line regiments do not apply to the
Grenadier, Coldstream, Scots, Irish and Welsh Guards. We have already
mentioned that the King’s colour, as a rule, consists of a Union Jack,
whilst the regimental colour is a flag bearing the devices and honours
of the regiment to which it belongs. In the Guards, however, this rule
is reversed, and the Jack constitutes the regimental, and the banner,
charged with devices, the King’s colour. Another difference which may be
mentioned concerns the battle honours. These are not placed on the royal
colours in the majority of foot regiments, but the Guards show them on
both the King’s and regimental colours. (The Irish and Welsh Guards at
the time of writing possess no battle honours, they being comparatively
new units.)

=The Grenadier Guards= have three flags, known as the Colonel’s, the
Lieutenant-Colonel’s, and the Major’s colours, which are used as the
King’s colour in the first, second and third battalions respectively.

[Illustration:

  =17.= King’s Colour of the Grenadier Guards (1st Battalion).
]

[Illustration:

  =18.= Regimental Colour of the Grenadier Guards (15th Company).
]

[Illustration:

  =19.= King’s Colour of the Coldstream Guards (1st Battalion).
]

[Illustration:

  =20.= Regimental Colour of the Coldstream Guards (1st Company).
]

[Illustration:

  =21.= King’s Colour of the Scots Guards (1st Battalion).
]

[Illustration:

  =22.= Regimental Colour of the Scots Guards (9th Company).
]

[Illustration:

  =23.= King’s Colour of the Irish Guards.
]

[Illustration:

  =24.= King’s Colour of the Welsh Guards.
]

                  PLATE 3. COLOURS OF THE FOOT GUARDS

The Colonel’s or King’s first battalion colour consists of a crimson
silk banner bearing an imperial crown above a flaming grenade. (Fig.
17.) On either side is a column of twelve tablets in gold, each
inscribed with the name of one of the following battle distinctions:—

Tangier, 1680; Namur, 1695; Gibraltar, 1704-5; Blenheim; Ramillies;
Oudenarde; Malplaquet; Dettingen; Lincelles; Egmont-op-Zee; Corunna;
Barrosa; Nive; Peninsula; Waterloo; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Egypt,
1882; Tel-el-Kebir; Suakin, 1885; Khartoum; South Africa, 1899-1902;
Modder River.

The Lieutenant-Colonel’s or the King’s colour of the second battalion
consists of a crimson silk banner bearing in the dexter canton, a small
Union Jack, whilst in the centre of the crimson field is the Royal
Cypher, reversed and interlaced, having above it an imperial crown, and,
below, a flaming grenade. Battle honours also appear.

The Major’s colour, which serves as that of the King’s for the third
battalion, is like the above, but from the sinister or bottom right hand
corner of the small Jack issues a pile-wavy or, that is, a tongue of
flame worked in gold.

In addition to the foregoing, there are three regimental colours, one
for each of the three battalions. These flags bear the device of the
Union Jack, full size, upon the four red centre limbs of which figure
the Royal Crown, a flaming grenade, certain battle distinctions, and a
special badge.

The special badge varies not only with each battalion, but with every
new flag that is supplied to replace a discarded one. There is a series
of thirty of these badges, each one of which is a company badge of the
Grenadier Guards. They are as follows:—

  1st Company.—A golden lion wearing a crown and standing upon another
  crown (i.e., the Royal crest as given on the current sixpenny
  piece). In the upper staff corner of the colour is placed in all
  these flags the company number in Roman numerals.

  2nd Company.—A red Tudor rose with a white centre.

  3rd Company.—A fleur de lys.

  4th Company.—A portcullis with chains hanging from it. This device
  was taken by Henry VII. from the badge of the House of Somerset. His
  mother, it will be remembered, was Margaret, daughter of John, Duke
  of Somerset.

  5th Company.—A white rose in a glory or sun. This was the badge of
  the Earldom of March.

  6th Company.—A thistle and rose, stalked and leaved. It was the
  device adopted by James I. to signify the union which had been
  effected between England and Scotland.

  7th Company.—The harp of Ireland.

  8th Company.—The red dragon of Cadwallader, on a green mount. This
  device was used by the sovereigns of the united Houses of York and
  Lancaster. It was taken by Henry VII. to remind people of his
  descent from Cadwallader, whose shield bore the red dragon as a
  supporter.

  9th Company.—A white greyhound, with a red collar, standing on a
  green mount. An old badge belonging to the Earl of Richmond.

  10th Company.—A sun in splendour with a human face, a badge selected
  by Richard II. when he desired to improve upon the badge of his
  father. Richard used a full sun in contradistinction to his father’s
  rising or partial sun.

  11th Company.—A white unicorn of Scotland, gorged with a golden
  prince’s coronet and chain, on a green mount. This was an old badge
  of James I.

  12th Company.—A white antelope, gorged with a ducal crown and chain,
  standing on a green mount—a well known device of Henry IV., son of
  John of Gaunt. He appropriated this animal from the escutcheon of
  the House of Lancaster.

  13th Company.—A white hart, gorged with a ducal crown and chain, on
  a green mount; a badge assumed by Richard II. from the devices of
  his mother, Joan, daughter of Edmund, Earl of Kent.

  14th Company.—A white falcon with extended wings, perched on the
  barrel of a closed golden fetterlock. Edward IV., in addition to the
  device of the white rose which was taken from the Earl of March,
  selected this white falcon from the badge of his grandfather, the
  first Duke of York.

  15th Company.—A red rose with green stalks and leaves (Fig. 18).

  16th Company.—A white swan, gorged with a ducal crown and chain, on
  a green mount. It may be remembered that Humphrey, Earl of Hereford,
  used a swan argent, and his daughter, when she married Henry IV.,
  took the same device.

  17th Company.—A white falcon, crowned and bearing a sceptre,
  standing on the stump of a tree out of which is growing a branch
  bearing three roses, one white and two red. This was Elizabeth’s
  badge, to remind people that she was descended from both the Houses
  of York and Lancaster.

  18th Company.—A stump of a tree which was the badge of Edward III.;
  assumed by him to point out how flourishing was his family.

  19th Company.—A golden sceptre and sword proper—a device used by the
  House of Stuart.

  20th Company.—A green oak tree on a green mount. In the branches of
  the tree may be seen the head of Charles II. peeping out. This is an
  emblem to remind us of his hiding after the Battle of Worcester.

  21st Company.—A sun rising behind clouds. This is a badge of Edward
  the Black Prince, which he assumed when he felt that his princely
  deeds were on the point of revealing him to the world as a man
  possessing a glorious future.

  22nd Company.—A beacon or cresset with flames. This device was used
  by Henry V. when he wished to tell people that his deeds would shed
  a radiance similar to those of the flames of a fire.

  23rd Company.—Silver ostrich feathers, crossed. The Lancastrians
  took this device.

  24th Company.—A white hart with golden antlers springing from the
  gate of a golden triple towered castle. This badge appears to be of
  Irish origin.

  25th Company.—A red cross of St. George, on a silver shield.

  26th Company.—The arms of Nassau. A golden lion rampant, crowned,
  standing near to eight billets on a blue shield. The Counts of
  Nassau, it will be remembered, were connected by marriage with the
  English Royal family.

  27th Company.—The badge of the Order of the Bath, a device
  comprising the rose, thistle, shamrock, etc.

  28th Company.—Three crests of German origin, emanating from Saxony,
  Brunswick and Hanover.

  29th Company.—A shamrock.

  30th Company.—The crest of the Prince Consort, i.e., from out of a
  ducal Coronet appears a pillar crowned with a coronet from which
  issues a plume of three peacocks’ feathers. The arms of Saxony are
  shown on the pillar.

=The Coldstream Guards= also have three flags, known as the Colonel’s,
the Lieutenant-Colonel’s, and the Major’s colours, which are used as the
King’s colour in the first, second, and third battalions respectively.

The Colonel’s or King’s first battalion colour consists of a crimson
silk banner bearing the Star of the Order of the Garter, i.e., the cross
of St. George in the garter, on an eight-rayed star. A Sphinx
superscribed “Egypt” is placed below, and at the foot of the Sphinx is a
scroll, bearing the inscription, “South Africa’, 1899-1902.” (Fig. 19.)
On either side of these devices is a column of ten tablets in gold, each
inscribed with the name of one of the following battle distinctions:—

Tangier, 1680; Namur, 1695; Gibraltar, 1704-5; Oudenarde; Malplaquet;
Dettingen; Lincelles; Talavera; Barrosa; Fuentes d’Onor; Nive;
Peninsula; Waterloo; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Egypt, 1882;
Tel-el-Kebir; Suakin, 1885; South Africa, 1899-1902; Modder River.

The Lieutenant-Colonel’s or the King’s colour of the second battalion
consists of a crimson silk banner bearing in the upper corner next to
the staff a small Union Jack, whilst in the centre of the crimson field
is a star of eight rays and, below it, the Sphinx of Egypt. Battle
honours also appear.

The Major’s colour, which serves as that of the King’s for the third
battalion, is like the above, but from the bottom right-hand corner of
the small Jack issues a pile-wavy or.

In addition to the foregoing, there are three regimental colours, one
for each of the three battalions. These flags bear the device of the
Union Jack, full size, upon the four red centre limbs of which figure
the Royal Crown, certain battle distinctions, the Sphinx of Egypt, and a
special badge.

The special badges vary as set out for the Grenadier Guards. They are as
follows:—

  1st Company.—A white lion on a green mount, surmounted by an
  imperial crown. (Fig. 20).

  2nd Company.—The Prince of Wales’ feathers in silver, with gold
  quills, encircled by the coronet of Edward the Black Prince.

  3rd Company.—A white tiger, having flames of fire emitted from the
  mouth and ears, on a green mount.

  4th Company.—Crossed swords, with points upwards, in silver. The
  hilt and pommel are in gold.

  5th Company.—The St. George and Dragon.

  6th Company.—A red rose with golden seeds and green thorns, in a
  garter, a badge of Henry IV. of Lancaster.

  7th Company.—A centaur provided with a bow and arrow, on a green
  mount. These were the royal arms of Stephen.

  8th Company.—Two crossed sceptres in gold.

  9th Company.—The knot of the collar of the Order of the Garter. This
  was the royal device of Richard II.

  10th Company.—A carbuncle, in gold. This precious stone formed one
  of the badges of Geoffrey, Count of Anjou, whose other badge, the
  planta genista, is world famous.

  11th Company.—A white boar, passant, bristled gold, on a green
  mount—a badge of the House of Warwick.

  12th Company.—A dun cow, on a green mount. The dun cow of Dunsmore
  Heath, near Rugby, has the tradition of being slain by Guy of
  Warwick.

  13th Company.—A red and white rose impaled with a golden pomegranate
  bearing green leaves. This device was brought from Spain by
  Katherine of Arragon.

  14th Company.—A white horse, galloping, on a green mount.

  15th Company.—The crown of Charlemange, in gold.

  16th Company.—The same badge as given for the 28th Company of
  Grenadier Guards.

=The Scots Guards= have three flags, known as the Colonel’s, the
Lieutenant-Colonel’s, and the Major’s colours, the first two of which
are used as the King’s colour in the first and second battalions.

The Colonel’s or King’s first battalion colour (Fig. 21) consists of a
crimson silk banner, bearing an imperial crown surmounting the Royal
Arms of Scotland. Under these are placed the motto, “En! Ferus Hostis”
(Lo! A savage foe), and the Sphinx of Egypt. On either side is a column
of seven tablets, in gold, each bearing the name of one of the following
battle distinctions: Namur, 1695; Dettingen; Lincelles; Talavera;
Barrosa; Fuentes d’Onor; Nive; Peninsula; Waterloo; Alma; Inkerman;
Sevastopol; Egypt, 1882; Tel-el-Kebir; Suakin, 1885; South Africa,
1899-1902; Modder River.

The Lieutenant-Colonel’s or the King’s colour of the second battalion
consists of a crimson silk banner bearing in the dexter canton a small
Union Jack, whilst in the centre of the crimson field is an imperial
crown, a Tudor rose, a thistle and shamrock, and the Sphinx of Egypt. On
this flag is the motto, “Unita fortior” (By union stronger). Battle
honours also appear.

The Major’s colour, which does not serve as that of the King’s colour,
as there is no third battalion, bears the star of the Order of the
Thistle, with a small Union Jack, from which issues a pile-wavy. There
is also the Egyptian Sphinx, and a motto, “Nemo me impune lacessit” (No
one provokes me with impunity).

The regimental colours of the Scots Guards consist of a full-size Union
flag, emblazoned with a crown and Sphinx, and bear the badges of the
companies, on lines similar to those laid down in connection with the
two former regiments of Guards. The first twelve badges are as follows:—

  1st Company.—A red lion standing on an imperial crown, all on a
  silver shield. The motto is “In defence.”

  2nd Company.—A hand grenade with a lighted fuse and the motto
  “Terrorem affero” (I carry terror with me).

  3rd Company.—The red rampant lion of Scotland. Motto, “Intrepidus”
  (Undaunted).

  4th Company.—The cross with a representation of St. Andrew, upon a
  star of silver, all under a thistle. Motto, “Nemo me impune
  lacessit.”

  5th Company.—A red lion, passant and full-faced, on a gold shield.
  Motto, “Timere nescius” (I do not know fear).

  6th Company.—A blue griffin, on a gold shield, the badge of Edward
  III. Motto, “Belloque ferox” (And ferocious in war).

  7th Company.—A salamander standing amidst flames—the badge of
  Francis I. of Orleans, who agreed to marry Mary, the sister of Henry
  VIII., when Louis XII. died, on consideration that Henry renounced
  all claims to the French throne. It may be added that Francis did
  not eventually marry Mary. Motto, “Per funera vitam” (Through death,
  life).

  8th Company.—A thunderbolt. Motto, “Horror ubique” (Dread
  everywhere).

  9th Company.—A cannon represented as though in the act of ejecting a
  projectile. Motto, “Concussæ cadent urbes” (The cities crashing
  fall). (Fig. 22).

  10th Company.—A green lizard, on a green mount. Motto, “Pascua nota
  mihi” (Green fields are my home).

  11th Company.—A cross of St. Andrew, on a blue shield. Motto, “In
  hoc signo vinces” (By this sign thou shalt conquer).

  12th Company.—A group of war trophies. Motto, “Honore præfero” (I
  put forth my honours).

=The Irish Guards=, which are of comparatively recent origin, have a
King’s colour of crimson silk, bearing, in the centre, the Royal Cypher,
in gold, surrounded by the collar of the Order of St. Patrick, with
badge appendant proper, the whole ensigned with the imperial crown.
(Fig. 23.)

The regimental colour is the Union flag, upon the central red limbs of
which are placed an imperial crown and the Royal cypher. There are eight
company badges. No battle honours have yet been assigned to this
regiment.

=The Welsh Guards=, which were formed in the summer of 1915, possess a
King’s colour of crimson silk, bearing the imperial crown and a dragon.
The motto, “Cymru am byth” (Wales for ever), appears on a gilt scroll.
(Fig. 24).

The regimental colour is the Union flag, upon the central red limbs of
which are placed an imperial crown, and a shield filled by three silver
lions.




                               CHAPTER VI
                      THE COLOURS OF THE INFANTRY


Each regiment of the Infantry possesses two colours, the King’s
colour—which is known as the Queen’s, when the reigning sovereign is a
woman—and the regimental colour. There are two exceptions to this rule:
(_a_) rifle regiments do not carry these emblems, and (_b_) a few units
possess a third colour, usually awarded for some service of exceptional
merit.

The King’s colour in every Infantry regiment consists of the Union flag
with the regimental badge or number placed in the centre of the St.
George’s Cross, the imperial crown figuring above whichever device is
used. When the regimental number appears on the King’s colour, Roman
figures are employed[10] (see Fig. 25); when a badge, it is placed
within a circle around which is printed the regimental title.[11] (See
Fig. 46).

The regimental colour is more involved in character. First, there is a
central device bearing one of the following: a badge (as Fig. 26), the
regimental number (as Fig. 29), the battalion number (as Fig. 30), or
the name of the battalion (as Fig. 40). Around this is placed a crimson
ring, upon which is printed the name of the regiment. Above the badge,
or ensigning it, is the imperial crown. Encircling all this is the union
wreath, consisting of roses, thistles, shamrocks, and appropriate
leaves, all growing from the same stalk—a very pleasing allusion to the
fusion of England, Ireland and Scotland. Then comes the array of battle
honours; when these are numerous they are placed upon a wreath which in
turn encircles the union wreath. This wreath is usually composed of
green foliage, but when the groundwork of the flag is of this hue, the
wreath is golden. When the battle honours are not numerous, a few are
placed on either side, also above and below the union wreath.
Territorial force battalions have but one honour, that for South Africa.
This is placed below the union wreath.

The four corners of the colour may contain devices, or they may be left
blank. In some flags a small union still figures in the dexter canton,
but the tendency to-day is to omit this. In the case of Fig. 39, which
is the colour of the Honourable Artillery Company, the small union is
given to show the manner of its display. It should be mentioned that the
number of the battalion is often printed in the dexter canton.

The colour of the flag depends upon the facings of the regiment; if
these are blue, that is to say, if the regiment is a royal one, the
groundwork of the flag is blue; if these are yellow, buff, or green, the
groundwork of the flag is yellow, buff or green; but if the facings are
white or scarlet, the flag is white, and bears the red cross of St.
George. Lastly, if the facings are black, the flag is black, with the
red cross superimposed. As the facings for all battalions of a regiment
are not necessarily the same, it is more convenient in the following
descriptions to give the colour of the facings, and leave the reader to
bear in mind the facts set out above.

Battle honours are, as a rule, shown on the regimental colours only.

=The Royal Scots (Lothian Regiment).=—Facings, blue.

R.C.[12]—The Royal Cypher within the Collar of the Order of the Thistle,
with the badge appendant. In each of the four corners the thistle within
the circle and motto of the Order, ensigned with the imperial crown. The
Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt.”

The Collar of the Order of the Thistle is made of gold, and consists of
alternate thistles and sprigs of rue enamelled in proper colours. The
badge is a golden image of St. Andrew, dressed in purple and green,
holding a cross before him. The motto is “Nemo me impune lacessit.”

  The honorary distinctions are: Tangier, 1680; Namur, 1695; Blenheim;
  Ramillies; Oudenarde; Malplaquet; Louisburg; Havannah; St. Lucia,
  1803; Egmont-op-Zee; Corunna; Busaco; Salamanca; Vittoria; St.
  Sebastian; Nive; Peninsula; Niagara; Waterloo; Nagpore; Maheidpoor;
  Ava; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Taku Forts; Pekin, 1860; South
  Africa, 1899-1902.

The Royal Scots hold the distinction of being the oldest regiment in our
army. It was raised under the name of Le Regiment de Douglas, about
1633. King George V. presented colours to the second battalion in 1913.

=The Queen’s (Royal West Surrey Regiment).=—Facings for the first four
battalions, blue; for the fifth, scarlet.

R.C.—The Cypher of Queen Catherine, within the Garter. In each of the
four corners the Paschal Lamb, with motto, “Pristinæ virtutis memor”
(The memory of former valour). Below the central badge, the motto, “Vel
exuviæ triumphant” (Arms triumph surely). A naval crown, superscribed
“1st June, 1794.” The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt.” This device was
granted after the campaign of 1801.

The Paschal Lamb is often spoken of as being a badge of the House of
Braganza, but Sir Sibbald Scott, an authority on these matters, declares
that it was never an emblem of the royal house of Portugal; it gained
this reputation by figuring in a picture which Sir Peter Lely painted of
Catherine. The regiment used the lamb “without any obvious meaning, and
that quite lately it assumed the paschal attributes.”

  The honorary distinctions are: Tangier, 1662-80; Namur, 1695;
  Vimiera; Corunna; Salamanca; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Toulouse;
  Peninsula; Affghanistan, 1839; Ghuznee, 1839; Khelat; South Africa,
  1851-2-3; Taku Forts; Pekin, 1860; Burma, 1885-7; Tirah; Relief of
  Ladysmith; South Africa, 1899-1902.

=The Buffs (East Kent Regiment).=—Facings, buff.

R.C.—The Dragon. In each of the four corners, the united Red and White
Rose, ensigned with the imperial crown. Motto, “Veteri frondescit
honore” (By its venerable honour may it flourish). This flag is shown in
Fig. 27.

The origin of the dragon is obscure, but the Buffs have descended from
the Trained Bands of the City of London, and probably the animal is a
corruption of the City’s griffin. The connection with the City permits
this regiment to march through the streets of this area with drums
beating and bayonets fixed.

  The honorary distinctions are: Blenheim; Ramillies; Oudenarde;
  Malplaquet; Dettingen; Guadaloupe, 1759; Douro; Talavera; Albuhera;
  Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive; Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula;
  Punniar; Sevastopol; Taku Forts; South Africa, 1879; Chitral; South
  Africa, 1900-02; Relief of Kimberley; Paardeberg.

Readers who have the opportunity of visiting the Guildhall should see
the colours which were retired in 1906, and then presented to the Lord
Mayor of London. They are exhibited in a glass case.

=The King’s Own (Royal Lancaster Regiment).=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The Royal Cypher within the Garter. In each of the four corners the
Lion of England.

The Garter is dark blue, edged with gold, and bears the motto, “Honi
soit qui mal y pense,” in gilt letters.

  The honorary distinctions are: Namur, 1695; Gibraltar, 1704-5;
  Guadaloupe, 1759; St. Lucia, 1778; Corunna; Badajoz; Salamanca;
  Vittoria; St. Sebastian; Nive; Peninsula; Bladensburg; Waterloo;
  Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Abyssinia; South Africa, 1879; South
  Africa, 1899-1902; Relief of Ladysmith.

This regiment is often known by the nickname of “The Lions,” from its
badge.

[Illustration:

  SAVING THE COLOURS OF THE BUFFS AT ALBUHERA
]

=The Northumberland Fusiliers.=—Facings, gosling green.

R.C.—The St. George and Dragon. In each of the four corners, the united
Red and White Rose, slipped and ensigned with the Royal Crest. The motto
is “Quo fata vocant” (Whither the fates call).

  The honorary distinctions are: Wilhelmstahl; St. Lucia, 1778;
  Roliça; Vimiera; Corunna; Busaco; Ciudad Rodrigo; Badajoz;
  Salamanca; Vittoria; Nivelle; Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula; Lucknow;
  Afghanistan, 1878-80; Khartoum; South Africa, 1899-1902; Modder
  River.

  The honour “Wilhelmstahl” figures as “Willems” in certain other
  colours.

The term “gosling green” has been obtained from Colonel Gosling, an
early and famous leader of the “Old and Bold.”

This regiment carries a third colour, also of gosling green, on
occasions of ceremony to celebrate the taking of an enemy colour at
Wilhelmstahl.

The colours of the 5th battalion are shown in Fig. 35.

=The Royal Warwickshire Regiment.=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The antelope. In each of the four corners, the united Red and White
Rose, slipped, ensigned with the imperial crown.

Probably, the antelope is used with no more significance than is the
case with the paschal lamb of the West Surreys. Legend says, however,
that the “Saucy Sixth” captured from a Moorish force a standard bearing
an antelope as its device and they appropriated it as their own badge in
remembrance of this prowess.

  The honorary distinctions are: Namur, 1695; Martinique, 1794;
  Roliça; Vimiera; Corunna; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Orthes;
  Peninsula; Niagara; South Africa, 1846-7, 1851-2-3; Atbara;
  Khartoum; South Africa, 1899-1902.

  The “Niagara” honour is shared with but few other regiments.

=The Royal Fusiliers (City of London Regiment).=—[See also the London
Regiment, p. 111]. Facings, blue.

R.C.—The united Red and White Rose within the Garter and the crown over
it. In each of the four corners the White Horse.

  The honorary distinctions are: Namur, 1695; Martinique, 1809;
  Talavera; Busaco; Albuhera; Badajoz; Salamanca; Vittoria; Pyrenees;
  Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Kandahar,
  1880; Afghanistan, 1879-80; South Africa, 1899-1902; Relief of
  Ladysmith.

“The old eighteenth century colour, which now hangs in the depot at
Hounslow, was probably acquired by the regiment about 1790.

“It was superseded by a set worked by the white fingers of the English
princesses themselves—a probably unique honour. The Royal ladies were
the sisters of the Duke of Kent, then Colonel of the Royal Fusiliers.
Although exceedingly heavy and unwieldy, from being overloaded with rich
gold embroidery, these Colours appear to have been carried for some
time, and may have been in the turmoil at Albuhera. But history is
silent on the subject of the colours of the 7th in the Peninsula War,
although the Fusiliers saw a lot of fighting, and bear no fewer than
nine honours on their Colours in memory of the fact.

“In 1829 a new set of Colours was presented to the regiment by Lady
Augusta Fitzclarence, while stationed at Malta, after which the
princesses’ Colours were given to Lord Frederick Fitzclarence, not
reverting to the regiment until 50 or 60 years later, when one of the
Fitzclarence family kindly presented them.

“The 1829 set saw no active service, and were retired in 1851, shortly
before the Crimean War broke out, and their remains placed in the
garrison chapel at Portsmouth. The King’s Colour has now practically
disappeared, and the other has more than half gone, the three white
horses and other decorations having dropped off.

“The next set was also presented by Lady Augusta Fitzclarence, and saw
some stirring adventures in the battle of the Alma, soon after the
regiment landed to begin its march into the interior. Both officers who
carried the colours fell on this occasion, as did also relief after
relief in their turn. At length one of the Colours—the regimental—was
dropped in the rear of a Russian battery, and lay there while the
Coldstream Guards marched over it, without being aware of the fact—for
all eyes were fixed upon the enemy in front. It was finally picked up by
General Sir Percy Fielding, who sent it back to the 7th.

“In 1897 the second battalion of the regiment, the 1st Yorkshire Light
Infantry, and the 2nd East Yorkshire Regiment, participated in what was
probably a unique ceremony, all three battalions receiving their new
Colours at one and the same time from the hands of the Duchess of York,
now Queen Mary. The Duchess was assisted by Lord Roberts, and the
ceremony took place at Phœnix Park, Dublin, in the presence of a vast
crowd.”[13]

=The King’s (Liverpool Regiment).=—Facings: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 7th, 7th
(Isle of Man) Volunteers, and 9th batts., blue; 5th and 8th batts.,
black; 6th and 10th (Scottish) batts., scarlet.

R.C.—The White Horse within the Garter. The motto, “Nec aspera terrent”
(Nor do difficulties terrify us). In each of the four corners, the Royal
Cypher, ensigned with the imperial crown. The Sphinx, superscribed
“Egypt.”

  The battle honours of the “Leather Hats” are: Blenheim; Ramillies;
  Oudenarde; Malplaquet; Dettingen; Martinique, 1809; Niagara; Delhi,
  1857; Lucknow; Peiwar Kotal; Afghanistan, 1878-80; Burma, 1885-87;
  South Africa, 1899-1902; Defence of Ladysmith.

=The Norfolk Regiment.=—Facings, yellow.

R.C.—The figure of Britannia. This flag is shown in Fig. 26.

Britannia was given as a badge to the “Fighting Ninth” by Queen Anne,
for the splendid work it did at Almanza in 1707. Among the nicknames of
this regiment perhaps the best known is that of the “Holy Boys,” an
appellation given to it by the Spaniards in the Peninsula, who took the
device of Britannia to be that of the Virgin Mary.

  The honorary distinctions are: Havannah; Martinique, 1794; Roliça;
  Vimiera; Corunna; Busaco; Salamanca; Vittoria; St. Sebastian; Nive;
  Peninsula; Cabool, 1842; Moodkee; Ferozeshah; Sobraon; Sevastopol;
  Kabul, 1879; Afghanistan, 1879-80; South Africa, 1900-02;
  Paardeberg.

=The Lincolnshire Regiment.=—Facings, white.

R.C.—The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt.” The central crimson badge bears
the Roman numeral X., this being the old tenth regiment.

  The honorary distinctions are: Blenheim; Ramillies; Oudenarde;
  Malplaquet; Peninsula; Sobraon; Punjaub; Mooltan; Goojerat; Lucknow;
  Atbara; Khartoum; South Africa, 1900-02; Paardeberg.

=The Devonshire Regiment.=—Facings, Lincoln green, except the 4th
battalion, which are black.

R.C.—The Castle of Exeter. Motto, “Semper fidelis” (Always faithful).

  The battle honours are: Dettingen; Salamanca; Pyrenees; Nivelle;
  Nive; Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula; Afghanistan, 1879-80; Tirah;
  South Africa, 1899-1902; Defence of Ladysmith; Relief of Ladysmith.

The record of this regiment during the last South African War is one of
special merit and interest.

=The Suffolk Regiment.=—Facings, yellow.

R.C.—The Castle and Key, superscribed “Gibraltar, 1779-83,” with the
motto, “Montis insignia Calpe” (The insignia of the Rock of Calpe, i.e.,
Gibraltar), underneath.

The Castle and Key were granted by King Ferdinand II. lo Gibraltar as
arms in 1502.

  The battle honours are: Dettingen; Minden; Seringapatam; India;
  South Africa, 1851-2-3; New Zealand; Afghanistan, 1878-80; South
  Africa, 1899-1902.

This regiment, “The Old Dozen,” is remembered for its capture of many
stands of rebel colours at Seringapatam.

The flag of the 4th battalion is shown in Fig. 37 and, as will be seen
from it, the badge is a Castle. (Idem for the 5th battalion).

=Prince Albert’s (Somerset Light Infantry).=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—A mural crown, superscribed “Jellalabad,” in the central crimson
badge, and, below, the Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt.”

The mural crown, a device which is associated with the name of
Jellalabad, was given to this regiment in token of its fine work in the
first Afghan War, when not only a human but a natural foe cast about, in
vain, to bring it defeat. We are alluding to the crafty Afghans and the
appalling earthquakes which rent the walls and buildings of Jellalabad
whilst Robert Sale was in command.

  The battle honours are: Gibraltar, 1704-5; Dettingen; Martinique,
  1809; Ava; Affghanistan, 1839; Ghuznee, 1839; Cabool, 1842;
  Sevastopol; South Africa, 1878-9; Burmah, 1885-87; South Africa,
  1899-1902; Relief of Ladysmith.

=The Prince of Wales’s Own (West Yorkshire Regiment).=—Facings, buff for
all battalions, except the 7th and 8th, which are black.

R.C.—The Prince of Wales’s plume. The White Horse. The Royal Tiger,
superscribed “India” and the motto, “Nec aspera terrent.” This flag is
shown in Fig. 31.

  The battle honours are: Namur, 1695; Tournay; Corunna; Java;
  Waterloo; Bhurtpore; Sevastopol; New Zealand; Afghanistan, 1879-80;
  South Africa, 1899-1902; Relief of Ladysmith.

“Although the West Yorkshires were raised so long ago as 1685, their
Colours had no honours for great early battles until (a few years back)
‘Namur, 1695’ was granted. ‘Corunna’ was the first name to be inscribed
thereon, and, although ‘Tournay’ was tardily authorised in 1836, it was
first placed on the stand issued to the regiment in 1853. Thus the set
issued in 1819 to replace the tattered rags presented eighteen years
before, and which had time and again led the regiment on to victory in
Mauritius, in Java, and in Bengal—hard services which wore the Colours
out so rapidly that they were described as being ‘fairly worn off the
staves’ some years previously—bore only three honours, of which the
third, ‘Java,’ was won by the first battalion; the second, ‘Waterloo,’
by the third battalion; and the first, ‘Corunna,’ by the second
battalion.

“The next honour to be gained by the 14th was ‘Bhurtpore,’ in 1820.
Hardly had the great mine beneath the hostile walls been sprung, when
the besiegers were seen rushing forward to the assault, the Colours of
the regiment beckoning in the very forefront, and being, it is said, the
first to be planted on the walls of the ‘impregnable’ Jat fortress. The
1835 set, therefore, which replaced the ‘Bhurtpore’ Colours, had four
names emblazoned on them, and their successors five, ‘Tournay’ having by
this time been added. These, the Crimean Colours, under whose folds the
additional honours of ‘Sevastopol’ and ‘New Zealand’ were earned, were
not formally ‘presented’ but simply given out on parade without
ceremony, according to instructions from the War Office, which had been
suddenly smitten with a desire to save a pound or two here and there.
They were retired in 1876, and placed in Sandringham, by order of His
Majesty, then Prince of Wales, who had presented the new set to the
regiment at Lucknow.

“The campaign of 1879-80 in Afghanistan was the last occasion upon which
the West Yorkshires carried their Colours into action, and that honour
was, needless to say, added to the many others which the regiment had
earned the right to bear.”[14]

=The East Yorkshire Regiment.=—Facings, white for all battalions, except
the 5th (Cyclist), which are scarlet.

R.C.—The White Rose is the central badge.

  The battle honours are twelve in number: Blenheim; Ramillies;
  Oudenarde; Malplaquet; Louisburg; Quebec, 1759; Martinique, 1762,
  1794, 1809; Havannah; St. Lucia, 1778; Guadaloupe, 1810;
  Afghanistan, 1879-80; South Africa, 1900-02.

The “Snappers,” as this regiment is nicknamed, have been in some of the
fiercest contests fought by the British Army, notably in the American
War, at Blenheim, and at Quebec, when General Wolfe was killed.

The colours of the 4th battalion are shown in Fig. 33.

=The Bedfordshire Regiment.=—Facings, white.

R.C.—The united Red and White Rose, placed below the union wreath. The
regimental number XVI. figures in the space for the central badge. The
flag is shown in Fig. 29.

  The battle honours are: Namur, 1695; Blenheim; Ramillies; Oudenarde;
  Malplaquet; Surinam; Chitral; South Africa, 1900-02. These
  distinctions are not arranged, as is usual, in a circular order, but
  three are placed on either horizontal limb of the St. George’s Cross
  and one on each of the vertical limbs.

=The Leicestershire Regiment.=—Facings, white.

R.C.—The Royal Tiger, superscribed “Hindoostan,” placed below the union
wreath, a numeral figuring in the space for the central badge.

  The battle honours are: Namur, 1695; Louisburg; Martinique, 1762;
  Havannah; Affghanistan, 1839; Ghuznee, 1839; Khelat; Sevastopol; Ali
  Masjid; Afghanistan, 1878-79; Defence of Ladysmith; South Africa,
  1899-1902. These distinctions are not arranged, as is usual, in a
  circular order, but upon the horizontal and lower vertical limbs of
  the St. George’s Cross.

The Royal Tiger was granted to the “Lily Whites” for their splendid work
in India during the early years of the nineteenth century.

=The Royal Irish Regiment.=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The Harp and Crown. In each of the four corners, a shield with the
arms of Nassau, and the motto, “Virtutis Namurcencis Præmium” (The
reward of virtue at Namur). The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt.” The
Dragon, superscribed “China.”

The Nassau arms, which formed part of the badges of William of Orange,
were bestowed upon the Royal Irish in commemoration of the splendid way
in which it stormed the Castle of Namur in 1695, in the presence of the
King.

  The battle honours are: Namur, 1695; Blenheim; Ramillies; Oudenarde;
  Malplaquet; Pegu; Sevastopol; New Zealand; Afghanistan, 1879-80;
  Egypt, 1882; Tel-el-Kebir; Nile, 1884-85; South Africa, 1900-02.

It is well known that the bravery of this and other Irish regiments in
South Africa caused Queen Victoria to raise the Irish Guards.

=Alexandra, Princess of Wales’s Own (Yorkshire Regiment).=—Facings,
grass green.

R.C.—The Cypher of H.R.H. Alexandra, Princess of Wales, in gold (thereon
“Alexandra”), interlaced with the Dannebrog, inscribed with the date
1875, and the whole surmounted by the Coronet of the Princess.

The Dannebrog is the name given to the white cross which the Danish king
Waldemar was supposed to have seen in the red sky on the night before he
met the Livonians in battle. His encounter was successful, and he
therefore looked upon the cross as a sign sent to him from heaven. So
deeply impressed was he by the apparition that he straightway accepted
it as a national symbol, and it has been chosen as the badge of the
“Green Howards” owing to their patron being our honoured Queen Mother.

  The battle honours are: Malplaquet; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol;
  Tirah; South Africa, 1899-1902; Relief of Kimberley; Paardeberg.

The colours of the 4th battalion are shown in Fig. 31.

=The Lancashire Fusiliers.=—Facings, white.

R.C.—The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt,” placed below the union wreath,
and, within the circular badge, the Red Rose. The motto is “Omnia audax”
(Daring everything).

  The battle honours are: Dettingen; Minden; Egmont-op-Zee; Maida;
  Vimiera; Corunna; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula;
  Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Lucknow; Khartoum; South Africa,
  1899-1902; Relief of Ladysmith.

The colours of this regiment have been subjected to more than ordinary
vicissitudes. They were burnt in order that they should not fall into
the hands of the enemy when forced to surrender at Saratoga; they were
lost during the retreat from Corunna, but happily found again on
reaching Portsmouth, and in the Crimea they were riddled by the Russian
bullets.

At the Royal United Service Museum may be seen one of the old colours,
dating from the time when the regiment was known as the 20th, or East
Devonshires. It is exhibit No. 3,084, and bears the inscription:—

  “Portion of the Colours of the 20th Regiment, presented to it in
  1803 by Colonel Robert Ross, the hero of Bladensburg; they were
  retired from service in 1815. The 20th fought under them at the
  victory of Maida in 1806, and they led the Regiment in the following
  memorable battles of the Peninsula War: Vimiera, Corunna, Vittoria,
  the Pyrenees, Nivelles, Orthes, and Toulouse.”

=The Royal Scots Fusiliers.=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The Thistle within the circle and motto of the Order of the
Thistle. In each of the four corners, the Royal Cypher, ensigned with
the imperial crown.

The motto of this Order is “Nemo me impune lacessit.”

  The honorary distinctions are: Blenheim; Ramillies; Oudenarde;
  Malplaquet; Dettingen; Martinique, 1794; Bladensburg; Alma;
  Inkerman; Sevastopol; South Africa, 1879; Burma, 1885-87; Tirah;
  South Africa, 1899-1902; Relief of Ladysmith.

The colours of this regiment were captured by the French at Blenheim
during an overwhelming charge, but were fortunately regained later. At
New Orleans they underwent an experience probably unparalleled in the
history of all regimental flags. A quartermaster-sergeant, fearing that
they might be lost, tore them from their staff and wrapped them round
his body. Unfortunately, he was taken prisoner, but, strange as it may
seem, he was able to hide them from his guards during the year or two
that he was kept confined. The faithful man was able to restore them to
his regiment when he regained England.

=The Cheshire Regiment.=—Facings, buff for all battalions but the 4th,
which are scarlet.

R.C.—The united Red and White Rose.

  The battle honours are: Louisburg; Martinique, 1762; Havannah;
  Meeanee; Hyderabad; Scinde; South Africa, 1900-02.

During the battle of Dettingen which, curiously enough, does not figure
among the honorary distinctions, King George II. was being harassed by
the French when a body of the “Two Twos” surrounded him, as he stood
under an oak tree, and protected his person. The King, to show his
gratitude, took a leaf from the tree, and offered it to the senior
officer. Ever since, the oak leaf has been an honoured badge of the
Cheshires, who wear it on their colours annually on September 12th.

=The Royal Welsh Fusiliers.=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The plume of the Prince of Wales. In the first and fourth corners,
the Rising Sun; in the second corner, the Red Dragon; in the third
corner, the White Horse, with the motto, “Nec aspera terrent.”

The plume, the rising sun, and the dragon are badges of the Prince of
Wales. They were assigned to the old 23rd as a reward for its services
in Marlborough’s campaign. The red dragon is, of course, frequently
associated with Welsh, tradition.

  The battle honours are: Namur, 1695; Blenheim; Ramillies; Oudenarde;
  Malplaquet; Dettingen; Minden; Corunna; Martinique, 1809; Albuhera;
  Badajoz; Salamanca; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Orthes; Toulouse;
  Peninsula; Waterloo; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Lucknow; Ashantee,
  1873-4; Burma, 1885-87; South Africa, 1899-1902; Relief of
  Ladysmith; Pekin, 1900.

[Illustration:

  =25.= King’s Colour of the Royal Welsh Fusiliers.
]

[Illustration:

  =26.= Regimental Colour of the Norfolk Regiment.
]

[Illustration:

  =27.= Regimental Colour of the buffs (East Kent Regiment).
]

[Illustration:

  =28.= Regimental Colour of the Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry.
]

[Illustration:

  =29.= Regimental Colour of the Bedfordshire Regiment.
]

[Illustration:

  =30.= Regimental Colour of the Hampshire Regiment.
]

[Illustration:

  =31.= Regimental Colour of the Prince of Wales’s Own (West Yorkshire)
    Regiment.
]

[Illustration:

  =32.= Regimental Colour of the Dorsetshire Regiment.

  PLATE 4. COLOURS OF THE INFANTRY OF THE LINE
  (REGULAR BATTALIONS)
]

The King’s colour of this regiment is shown in Fig. 25.

The Brecknockshire Battalion possesses a colour bearing the Red Dragon,
passant.

=The South Wales Borderers.=—Facings, grass green.

R.C.—The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt,” placed below the union wreath,
and, within the circular badge, the regimental number.

  The honorary distinctions are: Blenheim; Ramillies; Oudenarde;
  Malplaquet; Cape of Good Hope, 1806; Talavera; Busaco; Fuentes
  d’Onor; Salamanca; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Orthes; Peninsula;
  Punjaub; Chillianwallah; Goojerat; South Africa, 1877-8-9; Burma,
  1885-87; South Africa, 1900-02.

This regiment is the proud possessor of an unique distinction—a silver
wreath of immortelles, presented by Queen Victoria—which it wears on the
King’s colours in memory of the gallantry displayed by Lieutenants
Melvill and Coghill, V.C. Mr. Philip A. Wilkins, in his book, “The
History of the Victoria Cross,” describes the thrilling work of these
two fine soldiers, as follows:—

  “Lieutenant Coghill had been told off to act as galloper to Colonel
  Glyn on the unfortunate reconnaissance made from Isandlwana Camp, on
  January 22nd, 1879, but that officer, seeing he was quite lame,
  insisted that, he should remain behind and nurse his knee, injured
  while out foraging a few days before. He therefore remained in the
  camp, which, as soon as the Zulus had drawn off Lord Chelmsford and
  the main body of our troops, was attacked by an impi of 25,000 men,
  completely surrounded, and practically annihilated.

  “Colonel Pulleine, who was in command, seeing the desperate state of
  affairs, called to Lieutenant and Adjutant Melvill to take the
  Queen’s (as it then was) colour of the regiment and endeavour to cut
  his way through the mass of Zulus, to prevent its falling into the
  enemy’s hands. This order Lieutenant Melvill proceeded to carry out,
  and, with Lieutenant Coghill, spurred his horse over the rocky and
  dangerous ground to the Buffalo River, six miles distant.... In
  company with one mounted soldier, Melvill and Coghill reached the
  Buffalo and plunged in, the soldier being at once carried away by
  the whirling stream and drowned. Coghill reached the Natal side in
  safety, and turning round, saw Melvill, whose horse had been
  drowned, being carried down by the rushing torrent, and that the
  colour he had tried so hard to save had been wrenched from his
  grasp, and was floating away down the river. Though unable to walk
  owing to his injured knee, and knowing, as he did, that any accident
  to his horse meant certain death to him, with safety and life at
  hand if he chose to take them, yet Coghill refused to consider
  himself, and, turning his horse’s head, rode back again into the
  stream to Melvill’s assistance. The Zulus kept up a hot fire upon
  both men, and shortly afterwards Coghill’s horse was shot. With the
  greatest difficulty both managed to reach and climb the steep bank,
  and took shelter beneath some huge boulders....

  “Of their actual end no living man has ever borne witness, but when
  a search party under Major Black discovered the bodies of these
  brave men, a ring of dead Zulus around them bore silent testimony
  that they had sold their lives dearly, and had fought it out to the
  last.

  “The Queen, whose colours these officers had died to save, was quick
  to recognise such heroic bravery, and sent two wreaths to be placed
  on the arms of the cross which marks their grave by the Buffalo
  River, and later presented to the 24th Regiment the silver wreath
  mentioned above.”

This act won for these gallant officers the Victoria Cross and it
brought about the decision that colours should no more be carried into
battle, as it caused valuable lives to be lost in guarding them. This,
then, was the last occasion when these cherished emblems were taken into
the array of battle.

=The King’s Own Scottish Borderers.=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The Castle of Edinburgh, where the regiment was originally raised
by the Earl of Leven in 1689. The motto, “Nisi Dominus frustra” (Without
the Lord, it is useless). In the first and fourth corners, the Royal
Crest, with the motto, “In veritate religionis confido” (In the truth of
religion I confide). In the second and third corners, the White Horse,
with “Nec aspera terrent.” The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt,” below the
union wreath.

  The battle honours are: Namur, 1695; Minden; Egmont-op-Zee;
  Martinique, 1809; Afghanistan, 1878-80; Chitral; Tirah; South
  Africa, 1900-02; Paardeberg.

=The Cameronians (Scottish Rifles).=

Rifle regiments do not possess colours.

=The Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers.=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The Castle of Inniskilling with three turrets, and a St. George’s
flag flying from one of them. In each of the four corners the White
Horse, with the motto, “Nec aspera terrent.” The Sphinx, superscribed
“Egypt.”

  The battle honours are: Martinique, 1762; Havannah; St. Lucia, 1778,
  1796; Maida; Badajoz; Salamanca; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle;
  Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula; Waterloo; South Africa, 1835, 1846-7;
  Central India; South Africa, 1899-1902; Relief of Ladysmith.

=The Gloucestershire Regiment.=—Facings, white, except for the 5th
battalion, which are scarlet.

R.C.—No regimental badge figures within the central ring, but the
Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt,” is placed below the union wreath.

  The battle honours are: Ramillies; Louisburg; Guadaloupe, 1759;
  Quebec, 1759; Martinique, 1762; Havannah; St. Lucia, 1778; Maida;
  Corunna; Talavera; Busaco; Barrosa; Albuhera; Salamanca; Vittoria;
  Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive; Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula; Waterloo;
  Punjaub; Chillianwallah; Goojerat; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol;
  Delhi, 1857; South Africa, 1899-1902; Defence of Ladysmith; Relief
  of Kimberley; Paardeberg. (No colour bears a longer list of honours
  than those of this regiment)

=The Worcestershire Regiment.=—Facings, white.

R.C.—The united Red and White Rose with the motto, “Firm,” in the lower
vertical limb of the red St. George’s Cross. A Naval Crown, superscribed
“1st June, 1794,” in the upper vertical limb.

  The battle honours are: Ramillies; Mysore; Hindoostan; Roliça;
  Vimiera; Corunna; Talavera; Albuhera; Salamanca; Pyrenees; Nivelle;
  Nive; Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula; Ferozeshah; Sobraon; Punjaub;
  Chillianwallah; Goojerat; South Africa, 1900-02.

=The East Lancashire Regiment.=—Facings, white, for all battalions
except the 5th, which are black.

R.C.—The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt,” placed below the union wreath.
The motto, “Spectamur agendo” (By our actions, let us be judged).

  The honorary distinctions are: Gibraltar, 1704-5; Cape of Good Hope,
  1806; Corunna; Java; Badajoz; Salamanca; Vittoria; St. Sebastian;
  Nive; Peninsula; Waterloo; Bhurtpore; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol;
  Canton; Ahmad Khel; Afghanistan, 1878-80; Chitral; South Africa,
  1900-02.

=The East Surrey Regiment.=—Facings, white, except for the 6th
battalion, which are scarlet.

R.C.—The united Red and White Rose, placed beneath the union wreath.

  The honorary distinctions are: Gibraltar, 1704-5; Dettingen;
  Martinique, 1794; Guadaloupe, 1810; Talavera; Albuhera; Vittoria;
  Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive; Orthes; Peninsula; Cabool, 1842; Moodkee;
  Ferozeshah; Aliwal; Sobraon; Sevastopol; Taku Forts; New Zealand;
  Afghanistan, 1878-79; Suakin, 1885; South Africa, 1899-1902; Relief
  of Ladysmith.

Lord Strafford’s coat of arms includes a small representation of the
colours of this regiment. He was permitted to use this device in
recognition of his services at St. Pierre. In the heat of the fighting,
Strafford, who was then Sir John Byng, snatched up the colours and
carried them forward in a charge. His gallant action had a very fine
influence on the men, and this privilege of using a representation of
the colours in his arms must be one of which the family of Strafford are
rightly proud.

=The Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry.=—Facings, white.

R.C.—The united Red and White Rose, placed below the union wreath. This
flag is shown in Fig. 28.

  The honorary distinctions are: Gibraltar, 1704-05; Dettingen; St.
  Lucia, 1778; Dominica; Roliça; Vimiera; Corunna; Salamanca;
  Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive; Orthes; Peninsula; Waterloo; Punjaub;
  Mooltan; Goojerat; Sevastopol; Lucknow; Egypt, 1882; Tel-el-Kebir;
  Nile, 1884-85; South Africa, 1899-1902; Paardeberg.

The flag of the “Docs” must not be confused with that of the East
Surreys, to which it bears a very close resemblance. The colour reveals
little that is distinctive, and it seems a pity, somewhat, that a
regiment with such a fine record at Lucknow, Cawnpore, and elsewhere
should not possess devices of more interest. Its motto, “One and All,”
which, however, does not figure on the flag, is, we believe,
unrecognised by the authorities.

=The Duke of Wellington’s (West Riding Regiment).=—Facings, scarlet.

R.C.—The late Duke of Wellington’s crest, with the motto in an escroll
above, “Virtutis fortuna comes” (Fortune, the friend of pluck). The
Elephant, superscribed “Hindoostan.”

The Duke’s crest consists of a three-quarter length rampant lion
emerging from a crown and grasping in its fore-paws a flag bearing the
cross of St. George.

The elephant with a howdah is obviously a badge gained for services in
India.

  The battle honours are: Dettingen; Mysore; Seringapatam; Ally Ghur;
  Delhi, 1803; Leswarree; Deig; Corunna; Nive; Peninsula; Waterloo;
  Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Abyssinia; South Africa, 1900-02; Relief
  of Kimberley; Paardeberg.

This regiment, the only one named after a person not of royal blood, had
a “battalion in the Bergen-op-Zoom disaster, but before the English, who
had managed to get within the fort, were compelled to surrender, the
Colour-bearers of the regiment were sent back over the walls with
instructions to save the Colours as best they could. They were
successful; in fact, not one Colour has ever been lost by this famous
corps in battle.

“New Colours were presented in 1813, and these were carried at the
battle of Waterloo two years later. The 33rd formed part of Halkett’s
Brigade, which occupied the centre of the line, and was almost crumpled
to pieces by the efforts of Napoleon’s massed guns. These Colours
continued to be carried until 1830, when they were reported upon at
Spanish Town as ‘very old, and scarcely to be distinguished as Colours.’

“The ‘Havercake Lads’ were present, as was only fit, at the funeral of
the great Duke after whom they were named, in 1852, and the regimental
Colour carried on that occasion underwent rather a curious adventure.

“When the Colours were brought from Glasgow to London for the ceremony,
they were left in the house of Colonel Blake, of the regiment, in
Portland Place, for a while. Now, although this particular set had never
been in battle, they were in ribbons as the result of much bad weather
in various climes, and their tattered condition struck pity to the
feminine heart of Mrs. Colonel Blake.

“‘Men are so careless,’ she said to herself; ‘fancy letting them get
into that state! I’ll mend the Colours for them.’

“The regimental Colour being white with a red cross, Mrs. Blake’s white
silk wedding dress was just the thing for repairs—and for repairs
accordingly it was used, and the offending Colour was nicely patched, to
the consternation of the regiment when they saw it. But out of
consideration for the lady’s feelings, the patches were never removed,
and can still be seen quite plainly.

  “This set was retired at Dublin in 1854, and taken possession of by
  the commanding officer. His widow afterwards presented both Colours
  to the Royal United Service Institute, in which museum in Whitehall,
  they hang to this day.”[15]

The exhibit bears the following inscription: Colours of the 33rd
Regiment, 1832-54, then known as the 1st Yorkshire (West Riding), which
were presented to the battalion in 1832, at Weedon, by General Sir
Charles Whale, K.C.B., colonel of the regiment. The first is the
ordinary Royal colour of the great Union; and the second, or regimental
colour, the Red Cross of St. George on a white field, and only two
honours are attached, those of “Peninsula” and “Seringapatam.” They have
never been on active service, but they are associated with two
interesting military events. From 1838 to 1840 the 33rd were at
Gibraltar, and there under these colours H.R.H. the late
Commander-in-Chief, then Prince George of Cambridge, was attached for
duty to the battalion on his first introduction to the British Army. The
33rd, as is well known, monopolised most of the regimental service of
the great Duke of Wellington, and at his funeral on the 18th November,
1852—to attend which the regiment was brought to London from
Glasgow—these colours proved a conspicuous mark. The colours were
retired from service at Dublin in 1851, prior to the 33rd proceeding to
the Crimea.

=The Border Regiment.=—Facings, white.

R.C.—A laurel wreath. The Dragon, superscribed “China.”

This regiment is a combination of the old 34th Cumberland and the 55th
Westmoreland; it now possesses the former’s laurel wreath, gained for
admirable services rendered on the fatal held of Fontenoy, and the
latter’s dragon, awarded in recognition of its work in China, 1842.

  The honorary distinctions are: Havannah; St. Lucia, 1778; Albuhera;
  Arroyo dos Molinos; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive; Orthes;
  Peninsula; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Lucknow; South Africa,
  1899-1902; Relief of Ladysmith.

This regiment is the only one with “Arroyo dos Molinos” as a battle
honour. In the Peninsula, by a surprise move, the old 34th took
prisoners almost all of the 34th regiment of French Infantry. As a
reward, they were allowed to wear a red and white ball in the front of
their shakos. When, later, this appointment became general among
infantry regiments, the Borders showed their displeasure at losing this
distinctive sign. By way of compensation, the battle honour of “Arroyo
dos Molinos” was granted to them.

“The colours which were carried in this fight became so tattered and
dilapidated in after years that the officers at length decided to have
them preserved under glass in order to lengthen their existence, and
they were sent, accordingly, to a tradesman in the Opera Colonnade,
London. While in his keeping, however, the building was, unfortunately,
burnt to the ground, and the charred remains of the colours were all
that was ever recovered from the ruins. Even these were thought worthy
of preservation, and now rest confined in a silver urn.

  “The colours which replaced the Bergen set in 1815 passed through
  strange vicissitudes before Lord Archibald Campbell at last rescued
  them in 1888. His attention was drawn to them by a pawnbroker’s
  advertisement which offered them for sale as though they had been a
  pair of mere window curtains. Needless to say, they were at once
  purchased, and are now safe with the other old colours of this
  historic regiment at Kendal.”[16]

=The Royal Sussex Regiment.=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The White Rousillon plume which it gained on the Heights of
Abraham, when it overcame Montcalm’s Rousillon regiment. This latter
force possessed the device of a white plume or feather, and the Royal
Sussex adopted it as their badge.

  The honorary distinctions are: Gibraltar, 1704-05; Louisburg;
  Quebec, 1759; Martinique, 1762; Havannah; St. Louis, 1778; Maida;
  Egypt, 1882; Nile, 1884-85; Abu Klea; South Africa, 1900-02.

The 5th (Cinque Ports) battalion carries colours bearing the arms of the
Cinque Ports, which consist of a half lion and a ship-stern, repeated
three times.

=The Hampshire Regiment.=—Facings, yellow for all battalions, except the
8th (Isle of Wight) Rifles, which are black.

R.C.—The Royal Tiger, superscribed “India.” This flag is shown in Fig.
30.

  The battle honours are: Blenheim; Ramillies; Oudenarde; Malplaquet;
  Dettingen; Minden; Tournay; Barrosa; Peninsula; Taku Forts; Pekin,
  1860; Charasiah; Kabul, 1879; Afghanistan, 1878-80; Burma, 1885-87;
  South Africa, 1900-02; Paardeberg.

The 7th battalion carries colours with the following devices: A Stirrup.
In the first and fourth corners, a White Rose, and in the second and
third, a Red Rose.

=The South Staffordshire Regiment.=—Facings, white.

R.C.—The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt,” placed below the union wreath.

  The honorary distinctions are: Guadaloupe, 1759; Martinique, 1762;
  Monte Video; Roliça; Vimiera; Corunna; Busaco; Badajoz; Salamanca;
  Vittoria; St. Sebastian; Nive; Peninsula; Ava; Moodkee; Ferozeshah;
  Sobraon; Pegu; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Lucknow; Central India;
  South Africa, 1878-79; Egypt, 1882; Nile, 1884-85; Kirbekan; South
  Africa, 1900-02.

=The Dorsetshire Regiment.=—Facings, grass green.

R.C.—The motto, “Primus in Indus” (First in India), because it was the
first regiment from the home country to be landed in India. Also, the
Castle and Key, superscribed “Gibraltar, 1779-83,” and the motto,
“Montis Insignia Calpe.” This flag is shown in Fig. 32.

  The battle honours are: Plassey; Martinique, 1794; Marabout;
  Albuhera; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive; Orthes; Peninsula; Ava;
  Maharajpore; Sevastopol; Tirah; South Africa, 1899-1902; Relief of
  Ladysmith.

The colours of the 54th or West Norfolk, now forming the second
battalion of the Dorsetshires, were on board the “Sarah Sands,” when
this vessel, laden with vast stores of ammunition, caught fire. When the
alarm was given, the room in which these emblems were placed was full of
smoke, and they were only rescued after an heroic attempt on the part of
Private Wiles and the Quartermaster. These colours may now be seen in
Norwich Cathedral.

=The Prince of Wales’s Volunteers (South Lancashire Regiment).=—Facings,
white for all battalions but the 5th, which are scarlet.

R.C.—The plume of the Prince of Wales. The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt.”

  The battle honours are: Louisburg; Martinique, 1762; Havannah; St.
  Lucia, 1778; Monte Video; Roliça; Vimiera; Corunna; Talavera;
  Badajoz; Salamanca; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Orthes; Toulouse;
  Peninsula; Niagara; Waterloo; Candahar, 1842; Ghuznee, 1842; Cabool,
  1842; Maharajpore; Sevastopol; Lucknow; New Zealand; South Africa,
  1899-1902; Relief of Ladysmith.

A set of retired colours belonging to this regiment may be seen in
Chelsea Hospital. The exhibit bears the following inscription:

“The Colours of the 40th Regiment. Presented to Sir Alexander Woodford
(for many years Colonel of that gallant Regiment), by Lieutenant-Colonel
Leslie and the officers of the Corps, on its return from service in New
Zealand, and delivered into his hands by Colonel A. Nelson, at the Royal
Hospital, Chelsea, 1867.”

=The Welsh Regiment.=—Facings, white for all battalions but the 7th
(Cyclist) battalion, which are scarlet.

R.C.—The Rose and Thistle on the same stalk, within the Garter. In the
first and fourth corners, the Royal Cypher ensigned with the imperial
crown: in the second and third corners, the Plume of the Prince of
Wales. The motto, “Gwell angau na chywilydd” (Death rather than shame).
A naval crown, superscribed “12th April, 1782.” (This device serves to
recall the defeat of De Grasse by Rodney at Martinique.)

  The battle honours are: Martinique, 1762; St. Vincent; Bourbon;
  Java; Detroit; Queenstown; Miami; Niagara; Waterloo; India; Ava;
  Candahar, 1842; Ghuznee, 1842; Cabool, 1842; Alma; Inkerman;
  Sevastopol; South Africa, 1899-1902; Relief of Kimberley;
  Paardeberg.

“The second battalion has been rather unfortunate with its colours,
losing one at Bergen-op-Zoom—it was afterwards taken to Paris—and the
other at Quatre Bras. This was taken by the (French) 8th Hussars, who
charged the regiment through the long corn just as the Prince of Orange
was interfering with its formation. It was not lost without a splendid
fight, however, Clarke, who carried it, receiving no fewer than
twenty-three wounds and losing the use of an arm in its defence.”[17] A
fragment of an old colour of the 41st is exhibited in the Royal United
Service Museum.

=The Black Watch (Royal Highlanders).=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The Royal Cypher within the Garter. The badge and motto of the
Order of the Thistle. In each of the four corners the Royal Cypher
ensigned with the imperial crown. The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt.”

  The honorary distinctions are: Guadaloupe, 1759; Martinique, 1762;
  Havannah; North America, 1763-64; Mysore; Mangalore; Seringapatam;
  Corunna; Busaco; Fuentes d’Onor; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive; Orthes;
  Toulouse; Peninsula; Waterloo; South Africa, 1846-7, 1851-2-3; Alma;
  Sevastopol; Lucknow; Ashantee, 1873-4; Egypt, 1882, 1884;
  Tel-el-Kebir; Nile, 1884-85; Kirbekan; South Africa, 1899-1902;
  Paardeberg.

=The Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry.=—Facings, white for
all battalions but the Buckinghamshire battalion, which are scarlet.

R.C.—The united Red and White Rose.

  The battalion honours are: Quebec, 1759; Martinique, 1762, 1794;
  Havannah; Mysore; Hindoostan; Vimiera; Corunna; Busaco; Fuentes
  d’Onor; Ciudad Rodrigo; Badajoz; Salamanca; Vittoria; Pyrenees;
  Nivelle; Nive; Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula; Waterloo; South Africa,
  1851-2-3; Delhi, 1857; New Zealand; South Africa, 1900-02; Relief of
  Kimberley; Paardeberg.

The “Light Bobs,” as this regiment is nicknamed, are a combination of
the old 43rd (Monmouthshire Light Infantry) and the 52nd (Oxfordshire
Light Infantry). A retired stand of flags of the former may be seen in
the Royal United Service Museum, bearing this inscription:

  “Colours of the 43rd, 1818-27, one of the regiments of the
  celebrated Light Division of Peninsula fame. The first or Royal
  colour is the Great Union, and the second, or regimental colour, the
  Red Cross of St. George on the white field. They only bear the one
  distinction, ‘Peninsula,’ the other honours shortly afterwards
  authorised not having been added. They were made to replace those
  carried with such distinguished honour in the Peninsula, and were
  presented to the regiment in 1818 at Valenciennes. The colours were
  carried on parade at the celebrated review held on 23rd October,
  1818, the day before the break-up of the Army, when the whole of the
  British, Hanoverian, Saxon, and Danish contingents, commanded by the
  Duke of Wellington, were paraded before the Emperor of Russia and
  King of Prussia, near Valenciennes. Their last public act was to
  accompany the regiment to the Peninsula in 1827, when five thousand
  British troops were despatched under General Sir Henry Clinton,
  owing to the disturbed state of Portugal, and the hostile attitude
  of Spain. A few months later the colours were retired from service,
  when a new set bearing the eleven additional honours authorised in
  1821 were presented by the wife of the commanding officer,
  Lieutenant-Colonel William Haverfield.”

Another stand of colours, in the same museum, represent the old 52nd
regiment. Here is the record exhibited with them:—

  “Colours of the 52nd Light Infantry, 1824-52, now the 2nd Battalion
  of the Oxfordshire Light Infantry, and they appropriately hang next
  those of their linked battalion and old Peninsula comrades, the
  43rd. The Royal or King’s colour is the Great Union, and is so
  dilapidated, that it can scarcely hold the honours attached to it.
  The regimental colour, which is in much better condition, is of buff
  silk, and bears fifteen honours—the largest number granted at the
  time to any corps, save one, the Rifle Brigade. They were presented
  to the regiment at St. John’s, New Brunswick, in 1823, to replace
  the colours which the 52nd had so nobly borne in the Peninsula and
  Waterloo. In that great struggle, the 52nd were commanded by the
  celebrated Lieutenant-Colonel John Colborne, afterwards Lord Seaton,
  he whom Napier justly described as ‘a man of singular talents for
  war, and capable of turning the fate of a battle.’ This
  distinguished soldier, who had so often led the regiment to victory
  and never hurried it into defeat, commanded the 52nd when these
  colours were taken into use in 1824. They have never faced a foreign
  foe, but they were silent witnesses of the steady discipline and
  bravery of the regiment on board the transport ‘Marquis of Huntly,’
  which was nearly lost in a hurricane in the Atlantic in 1831.”

=The Essex Regiment.=—Facings, white.

R.C.—The Castle and Key, superscribed “Gibraltar, 1779-83,” with the
motto, “Montis Insignia Calpe” underneath. The Sphinx, superscribed
“Egypt.” An Eagle. (This latter device is borne to recall the Eagle
captured by the 44th [Essex] from the 62nd French regiment at Salamanca.
The French Eagle is now in Chelsea Hospital).

  The battle honours are: Havannah; Moro; Badajoz; Salamanca;
  Peninsula; Bladensburg; Waterloo; Ava; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol;
  Taku Forts; Nile, 1884-85; South Africa, 1899-1902; Relief of
  Kimberley; Paardeberg.

At the headquarters of this regiment is preserved a small piece of
soiled rag which the casual observer might consider of small value. But
it is the corner of an old colour which possesses the following
interesting history. At Quatre Bras, a French Lancer gallantly charged
at the colours of the old 44th, and severely wounded Ensign Christie,
who carried one of them. The Frenchman then endeavoured to seize the
standard, but the brave Christie, with a presence of mind almost
unequalled, flung himself upon it. As the colours fluttered in the fall,
the Frenchman tore off a portion of the gay-coloured fabric with the
point of his lance, but he was not permitted to carry the precious
fragment far away, for he was shot. It is this piece, which was
carefully preserved, that now reposes at Warley.

=The Sherwood Foresters (Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire
Regiment).=—Facings, 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th battalions, white;
7th (Robin Hood) battalion, black; 8th battalion, green.

R.C.—The united Red and White Rose.

  The battle honours are: Louisburg; Roliça; Vimiera; Talavera;
  Busaco; Fuentes d’Onor; Ciudad Rodrigo; Badajoz; Salamanca;
  Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula; Ava; South
  Africa, 1846-7; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Central India;
  Abyssinia; Egypt, 1882; Tirah; South Africa, 1899-1902.

=The Loyal North Lancashire Regiment.=—Facings, white.

R.C.—The Red Rose.

  The honorary distinctions are: Louisburg; Quebec, 1759; Maida;
  Corunna; Tarifa; Vittoria; St. Sebastian; Nive; Peninsula; Ava;
  Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Ali Masjid; Afghanistan, 1878-79; South
  Africa, 1899-1902; Defence of Kimberley.

=The Northamptonshire Regiment.=—Facings, white.

R.C.—The Castle and Key, superscribed “Gibraltar, 1779-83,” with the
motto, “Montis Insignia Calpe.” The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt.”

  The battle honours are: Louisburg; Quebec, 1759; Martinique, 1762,
  1794; Havannah; Maida; Douro; Talavera; Albuhera; Badajoz;
  Salamanca; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula;
  Sevastopol; New Zealand; South Africa, 1879; Tirah; South Africa,
  1899-1902; Modder River.

=Princess Charlotte of Wales’s (Royal Berkshire Regiment).=—Facings,
blue.

R.C.—The Dragon, superscribed “China,” below the union wreath.

  The battle honours are: St. Lucia, 1778; Egmont-op-Zee; Copenhagen;
  Douro; Talavera; Albuhera; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive;
  Orthes; Peninsula; Queenstown; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Kandahar,
  1880; Afghanistan, 1879-80; Egypt, 1882; Suakin, 1885; Tofrek; South
  Africa, 1899-1902.

An old set of colours belonging to the 2nd battalion are exhibited in
the Royal United Service Museum. “They have a peculiar history attached
to them. The 2nd battalion of this regiment, with the 2nd battalion
48th, the Buffs, and 31st, were in Colborne’s brigade at Albuhera, which
was nearly destroyed. The loss of the four battalions amounted to 1,413,
of which the Berkshires reached 272, and so weak had they become that it
was found necessary to form them into provisional battalions, when the
66th (Berkshire) and the 31st were formed into a unit commanded by
Colonel Leith, of the 31st. It was necessary to supply the 66th with new
colours after the war. They duly arrived early in 1812, but were not
taken into use because the colours of the 31st, as the senior regiment,
were carried by the provisional battalion. They were, therefore, sent
home, and when the regiment arrived in England in the summer of 1814,
were sent to Plymouth to meet the battalion. But they were lost, never
reached their destination, and it was necessary to make another set for
the battalion. Not long afterwards, they turned up again, but too late
to be taken into use. They came into the possession of the commanding
officer, and were presented to the Royal United Service Museum.”[18]

[Illustration:

  =33.= East Yorkshire Regiment (4th Battalion).
]

[Illustration:

  =34.= Alexandra, Princess of Wales’s Own [Yorkshire Regiment] (4th
    Battalion).
]

[Illustration:

  =35.= The Northumberland Fusiliers (5th Battalion).
]

[Illustration:

  =36.= The London Regiment (7th [City of London] Battalion).
]

[Illustration:

  =37.= The Suffolk Regiment (4th Battalion).
]

[Illustration:

  =38.= The King’s [Shropshire Light Infantry] (4th Battalion).
]

[Illustration:

  =39.= Honourable Artillery Company, Infantry.
]

[Illustration:

  =40.= The London Regiment, (Blackheath and Woolwich, 20th [County of
    London] Battalion).
]

          PLATE 5. REGIMENTAL COLOURS OF THE TERRITORIAL FORCE

=The Queen’s Own (Royal West Kent Regiment).=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The motto, “Quo fas et gloria ducunt” (Where duty and glory lead).
The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt,” below the union wreath.

  The battle honours are: Vimiera; Corunna; Almaraz; Vittoria;
  Pyrenees; Nive; Orthes; Peninsula; Punniar; Moodkee; Ferozeshah;
  Aliwal; Sobraon; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Lucknow; New Zealand;
  Egypt, 1882; Nile, 1884–85; South Africa, 1900–02.

Before 1881, the facings of the regiment were black, but when, in this
year, the force attained a royal dignity, they became blue. New colours
to suit the change of hue were accordingly provided, and the old ones
burned with solemn reverence, the ashes being collected and placed in a
snuff box made from the wood of the flag pole.

A brave array of the retired colours of this regiment are to be seen in
All Saints’ Church, Maidstone.

=The King’s Own (Yorkshire Light Infantry).=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The White Rose of the House of York. The motto, “Cede nullis”
(Yield to nothing).

  The battle honours are: Minden; Corunna; Fuentes d’Onor; Salamanca;
  Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Orthes; Peninsula; Waterloo; Pegu; Ali
  Masjid; Afghanistan, 1878–80; Burma, 1885–87; South Africa,
  1899–1902; Modder River.

=The King’s (Shropshire Light Infantry).=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The united Red and White Rose, also the motto, “Aucto splendore
resurgo” (I arise with added splendour).

  The battle honours are: Nieuport; Toumay; St. Lucia, 1796; Talavera;
  Fuentes d’Onor; Salamanca; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive;
  Toulouse; Peninsula; Bladensburg; Aliwal; Sobraon; Punjaub;
  Goojerat; Lucknow; Afghanistan, 1879–80; Egypt, 1882; Suakin, 1885;
  South Africa, 1899–1902; Paardeberg.

The colours of the 4th battalion are shown in Fig. 38.

=The Duke of Cambridge’s Own (Middlesex Regiment).=—Facings, lemon
yellow.

R.C.—The Plume of the Prince of Wales, derived from the 2nd battalion,
which was formerly the old 77th East Middlesex. In each of the four
corners, the late Duke of Cambridge’s cypher and coronet, as figured on
the colours of the old 57th West Middlesex.

  The honorary distinctions are: Mysore; Seringapatam; Albuhera;
  Ciudad Rodrigo; Badajoz; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive;
  Peninsula; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; New Zealand; South Africa,
  1879; South Africa, 1900–02; Relief of Ladysmith.

=The King’s Royal Rifle Corps.=—Rifle regiments do not possess colours.

=The Duke of Edinburgh’s (Wiltshire Regiment).=—Facings, buff for the
first three battalions, and black for the 4th battalion.

R.C.—In each of the four corners, the late Duke of Edinburgh’s cypher
and coronet.

  The battle honours, on blue tablets, are: Louisburg; Nive;
  Peninsula; Ferozeshah; Sobraon; Sevastopol; Pekin, 1860; New
  Zealand; South Africa, 1879; South Africa, 1900–02.

Unfortunately, the “splash” which used to be worn on the buttons of this
regiment to commemorate the action of the men in firing away buttons
torn from their tunics on an occasion when all the ammunition was spent,
is not immortalised on the colours.

=The Manchester Regiment.=—Facings, white, except for the 6th battalion,
which are yellow.

R.C.—The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt,” placed below the union wreath.

  The battle honours are: Guadaloupe, 1759, 1810; Egmont-op-Zee;
  Martinique, 1809; Peninsula; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; New
  Zealand; Afghanistan, 1879–80; Egypt, 1882; South Africa, 1899–1902;
  Defence of Ladysmith.

=The Prince of Wales’s (North Staffordshire Regiment).=—Facings, white,
except for the 6th battalion, which are blue.

R.C.—The Prince of Wales’s Plume. The Dragon, superscribed “China,”
placed beneath the union wreath.

  The honorary distinctions are: Guadaloupe, 1759; Martinique, 1794;
  St. Lucia, 1803; Surinam; Punjaub; Persia; Reshire; Bushire;
  Koosh-ab; Lucknow; Hafir; South Africa, 1900–02.

The regiment, with its colours, nearly suffered disaster when on board
the “Alert,” which was wrecked off Halifax, Nova Scotia. The men fell in
on the lower deck, and awaited their fate, but, almost by a miracle, the
vessel was brought into port and all were saved. The Duke of Wellington
paid a high compliment to this gallant regiment, by decreeing that an
account of the disaster and its happy sequel should be read to all the
units of the Army.

=The York and Lancaster Regiment.=—Facings, white.

R.C.—The Union Rose, in the central badge, the Royal Tiger, superscribed
“India,” below the union wreath.

  The honorary distinctions, arranged upon the limbs of the St.
  George’s Cross, are: Guadaloupe, 1759; Martinique, 1794; India,
  1796–1819; Nive; Peninsula; Arabia; Lucknow; New Zealand; Egypt,
  1882, 1884; Tel-el-Kebir; South Africa, 1899–1902; Relief of
  Ladysmith.

=The Durham Light Infantry.=—Facings, dark green for all battalions,
except the 6th, which are scarlet.

R.C.—The united Red and White Rose, in the central circle.

  The honorary distinctions are: Salamanca; Vittoria; Pyrenees;
  Nivelle; Orthes; Peninsula; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol; Persia;
  Reshire; Bushire; Koosh-ab; New Zealand; South Africa, 1899–1902;
  Relief of Ladysmith. This roll is particularly strong in Indian
  honours, due to the fact that the 2nd battalion was raised by the
  East India Company under the name of the 2nd Bombay European Light
  Infantry.

=The Highland Light Infantry.=—Facings, buff for all battalions, except
the 9th, which are blue.

R.C.—The Elephant, superscribed “Assaye,” placed below the union wreath.
The Castle and Key, superscribed “Gibraltar, 1780–83,” with the motto,
“Montis Insignia Calpe,” underneath.

  The numerous battle honours are: Carnatic; Sholinghur; Mysore;
  Hindoostan; Seringapatam; Cape of Good Hope, 1806; Roliça; Vimiera;
  Corunna; Busaco; Fuentes d’Onor; Ciudad Rodrigo; Badajoz; Almaraz;
  Salamanca; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive; Orthes; Toulouse;
  Peninsula; Waterloo; South Africa, 1851–2–3; Sevastopol; Central
  India; Egypt, 1882; Tel-el-Kebir; South Africa, 1899–1902; Modder
  River.

“When the 71st (now the 1st Battalion Highland Light Infantry) left
England for the Peninsula War, Brigadier-General Pack ordered their
Colours to be left behind in the Tower of London, and the regiment
accordingly fought without any throughout the arduous Spanish campaigns.
Pack’s reason for leaving the Colours behind is not quite clear, but if
he thought they would be safer at home than on the field of battle he
was woefully mistaken. In 1814, soon after the close of the war in
question, the Prince Regent entertained the Allied Sovereigns to a grand
dinner in Carlton House, and among the table decorations on that
occasion were the Colours of the 71st, which were brought from the Tower
for the purpose. To debase such sacred emblems as Colours to such a use
was bad enough, but worse was to follow, for after the banquet, the
Colours disappeared, and were never seen again. They may turn up yet;
stranger things have happened.

“This was the stand which had been presented to the regiment by General
Floyd to replace that which had been lost during the unfortunate
expedition to Buenos Ayres, when the 71st, after being reduced to a mere
handful by the bullets of the Spaniards, were compelled to surrender as
prisoners of war. A piper’s banner, which was lost on the same occasion,
has since been restored to the regiment.

“The 71st took part in the ill-starred Walcheren expedition, but they do
not seem to have had their Colours with them on this occasion, for when
they landed and took possession of a flagstaff, a soldier’s red jacket
was hoisted in lieu of a proper flag.

“In 1841 the Duke of Wellington did this regiment the honour of
presenting it with new Colours at Windsor, the ceremony taking place in
the presence of the Queen, Prince Consort, and the King of Prussia. In
1857 Colours were received from the hands of the Duke of Cambridge.

“The former 74th, now the 2nd Battalion Highland Light Infantry, was one
of the corps which was granted a third Colour for bravery at Assaye.
This banner—which was white, bearing the elephant and ‘LXXIV.’ within a
wreath, and inscribed with the victories of Assaye and Seringapatam—was
referred to by an inspecting officer in 1830 as ‘a very honourable, but
useless, appendage, and takes one officer to carry it, who would be much
better with his company,’ and the same year it was ordered to be
abandoned by the regiment, except on gala days, reviews, etc.”[19]

=Seaforth Highlanders (Ross-shire Buffs, the Duke of
Albany’s).=—Facings, buff, except for the 5th (Sutherland and Caithness
Highland Battalion), which are yellow.

R.C.—In each of the four corners the late Duke of York’s cypher and
coronet (i.e., Frederick, at one time Duke of Albany). The motto,
“Cuidich’n Righ” (Help the King), was given to the Mackenzie as a reward
for protecting Alexander II. when attacked by a wounded stag. Also the
Elephant, superscribed “Assaye.”

  The battle honours are: Carnatic; Mysore; Hindoostan; Cape of Good
  Hope, 1806; Maida; Java; South Africa, 1835; Sevastopol; Persia;
  Koosh-ab; Lucknow; Central India; Peiwar Kotal; Charasiah; Kabul,
  1879; Kandahar, 1880; Afghanistan, 1878–80; Egypt, 1882;
  Tel-el-Kebir; Chitral; Atbara; Khartoum; South Africa, 1899–1902;
  Paardeberg.

This regiment was awarded a third colour by the East India Company for
services at Assaye (see Highland Light Infantry). It was made of white
silk and bore the word “Assaye” above a representation of an elephant,
the whole surrounded by a laurel wreath. The regimental number figured
prominently on this banner, which is often called the “Elephant colour.”
The colour was lost, and its history after about the year 1810 is
unknown.

=The Gordon Highlanders.=—Facings, yellow.

R.C.—The Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt”; also the Royal Tiger,
superscribed “India.” (One in each of the lower corners.)

  The many battle honours are: Mysore; Seringapatam; Egmont-op-Zee;
  Mandora; Corunna; Fuentes d’Onor; Almaraz; Vittoria; Pyrenees; Nive;
  Orthes; Peninsula; Waterloo; South Africa, 1835; Delhi, 1857;
  Lucknow; Charasiah; Kabul, 1879; Kandahar, 1880; Afghanistan,
  1878–80; Egypt, 1882, 1884; Tel-el-Kebir; Nile, 1884–85; Chitral;
  Tirah; South Africa, 1899–1902; Defence of Ladysmith; Paardeberg.

“The Regiment,” in its issue of October 28th, 1916, gives the following
interesting account of the Gordons’ colours:—

“One Colour of the original set presented to the gallant 92nd on its
formation in 1794 has disappeared, but its companion, the regimental
Colour, is not only still in existence, but is even in a good state of
preservation.

“This set went through the Holland campaign in 1799, and there is good
reason to suppose that the King’s Colour got very badly knocked about in
the fighting on that occasion. At any rate, when the union of Great
Britain and Ireland took place in 1801, it was replaced by a new Colour,
notwithstanding the small number of years it had been in use. The
regimental Colour, on the other hand, was merely altered so as to bring
it into line with the new pattern as sealed by the authorities. The
original number of the regiment—100—had already, in 1798, been changed
to 92, and the fresh alterations consisted chiefly of shamrock leaves,
which were added to the existing wreath of roses and thistles.

“The only active service which this very much adapted set of Colours
ever saw was in Egypt in the following year. By their valour at
Alexandria, Mandora, and other fights, the Gordons won the right to bear
the Sphinx on their Colours, and the badge was placed on all four
corners of the regimental one—a very rare thing.

“In 1807 the Colours were retired, and reverted, as usual, to the
colonel of the regiment, the Duke of Richmond and Gordon, who placed
them in his residence of Gordon Castle. In order the better to preserve
them, they have since been enclosed in a glass case, and both are in
remarkably good condition.

“Their successors had a much more stirring career. In 1807 they led the
Gordons on at Copenhagen. Next they accompanied them on their retreat to
Corunna, and at the battle itself, Colonel Alexander Napier fell beneath
their folds. When the regiment effected its landing at Walcheren later
on in the same year we read that the Colours were carried uncased and
upright in the centre boat of the flotilla.

“Not long afterwards they were sent back to the Peninsula, and the
Colours were carried throughout the war from Fuentes d’Onor onwards. At
Maya, one of the battles of the Pyrenees, the Colours fell to the ground
time after time, every officer but two being either killed or wounded,
and carried from the field. At St. Pierre the Gordons again advanced
with Colours flying and pipes skirling, and drove the enemy from his
positions.

“The last battle in which they were carried was Waterloo.”

=The Queen’s Own Cameron Highlanders.=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The Thistle ensigned with the imperial crown. The Sphinx,
superscribed “Egypt.”

  The honorary distinctions are: Egmont-op-Zee; Corunna; Busaco;
  Fuentes d’Onor; Salamanca; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive; Toulouse;
  Peninsula; Waterloo; Alma; Sevastopol; Lucknow; Egypt, 1882;
  Tel-el-Kebir; Nile, 1884–85; Atbara; Khartoum; South Africa,
  1900–02.

=The Royal Irish Rifles.=—Rifle regiments do not possess colours.

=Princess Victoria’s (Royal Irish Fusiliers).=—Facings, blue.

The Princess Victoria, who gave her name to this regiment, was
afterwards Queen Victoria.

R.C.—The Plume of the Prince of Wales. In the first and fourth corners,
Princess Victoria’s coronet; in the second, an Eagle, with a wreath of
laurel (to commemorate the one captured from the French at Barrosa); in
the third, the Harp and Crown; the Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt.” The
motto, “Faugh-a-Ballagh.” (Clear the way.)

  The battle honours are: Monte Video; Talavera; Barrosa; Tarifa;
  Java; Vittoria; Nivelle; Niagara; Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula; Ava;
  Sevastopol; Egypt, 1882–1884; Tel-el-Kebir; South Africa, 1899–1902;
  Relief of Ladysmith.

=The Connaught Rangers.=—Facings, green.

R.C.—The Harp and Crown, with the motto, “Quis separabit” (Who shall
separate?) The Elephant, the Sphinx, superscribed “Egypt.”

  The battle honours are: Seringapatam; Talavera; Busaco; Fuentes
  d’Onor; Ciudad Rodrigo; Badajoz; Salamanca; Vittoria; Pyrenees;
  Nivelle; Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula; Alma; Inkerman; Sevastopol;
  Central India; South Africa, 1877–8–9; South Africa, 1899–1902;
  Relief of Ladysmith.

=Princess Louise’s (Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders).=—Facings,
yellow.

R.C.—A Boar’s Head, with the motto, “Ne obliviscaris” (Do not forget),
within a wreath of myrtle. A Cat with the motto, “Sans Peur” (Without
fear), within a wreath of broom. Over all, the label as represented in
the arms of the Princess Louise, and surmounted with Her Royal
Highness’s coronet. In each of the four corners, Princess Louise’s
cypher and coronet.

This description seems somewhat involved, but the flag itself in no wise
furthers this idea. The badge, which is placed in the centre of the
flag, consists of a boar’s head, to represent the house of Campbell, and
a cat, seated, to represent the house of Sutherland. The label, spoken
of above, is merely a white bar, having three points projecting from it,
downwards, one at each end and one in the middle. This bar is a sign of
royalty, which figures in most of the royal arms.

  The battle honours are: Cape of Good Hope, 1806; Roliça; Vimiera;
  Corunna; Pyrenees; Nivelle; Nive; Orthes; Toulouse; Peninsula; Alma;
  Balaklava; Sevastopol; Lucknow; South Africa, 1846–7, 1851–2–3,
  1879; South Africa, 1899–1902; Modder River; Paardeberg. No other
  infantry regiment bears an honour for Balaklava.

Two old colours of this regiment are worth mentioning; one was burnt
while reposing in Inverary Castle, where it had been placed by the Duke
of Argyll; the other was used to enshroud the body, before burial, of a
lieutenant who was killed at New Orleans.

=The Prince of Wales’s Leinster Regiment (Royal Canadians).=—Facings,
blue.

R.C.—The Plume of the Prince of Wales, as the central badge. In each of
the four corners, a maple leaf.

  The battle honours are: Niagara; Central India; South Africa,
  1900–02. They are arranged one on each side and one below the union
  wreath.

The first battalion of this regiment is of Canadian origin, whilst the
2nd battalion was raised in India. At a time when such valuable
assistance has been proffered to the Empire by the Colonies, it is
pleasant to recall that the Royal Canadians were the very first unit
ever to come to the assistance of the Motherland; this it did during the
Indian Mutiny.

A King’s colour of the 2nd battalion is exhibited in the Royal United
Service Museum. “It forms one of a pair which was presented to the
regiment at Aden on the 23rd January, 1866, by Mrs. Raines, wife of
General Raines, C.B., who commanded the garrison. They were the first
colours presented to the regiment as a British regiment, it having been
before that time the Third Bombay European Regiment. The colours were
used until 2nd April, 1906, when they were replaced by a new pair at
Mauritius, the presentation being made by the Governor of the
Island.”[20]

=The Royal Munster Fusiliers.=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—A Shamrock. The Royal Tiger. (These two devices are placed in the
two lower corners of the colours.)

  The honorary distinctions are: Plassey; Condore; Masulipatam;
  Badara; Buxar; Rohilcund, 1774 and 1794; Carnatic; Sholinghur;
  Guzerat; Deig; Bhurtpore; Affghanistan, 1839; Ghuznee, 1839;
  Ferozeshah; Sobraon; Punjaub; Chillianwallah; Goojerat; Pegu; Delhi,
  1857; Lucknow; Burma, 1885–87; South Africa, 1899–1902.

=The Royal Dublin Fusiliers.=—Facings, blue.

R.C.—The Royal Tiger, superscribed “Plassey” and “Buxar,” with the
motto, “Spectamur agendo” (We are judged by our deeds). The Elephant,
superscribed “Carnatic” and “Mysore.” The tiger figures in the
right-hand lower corner; the elephant in the left-hand lower corner.

  The battle honours are: Arcot; Condore; Wandiwash; Sholinghur; Nundy
  Droog; Amboyna; Ternate; Banda; Pondicherry; Maheidpoor; Guzerat;
  Seringapatam; Kirkee; Beni Boo Alli; Aden; Punjaub; Mooltan;
  Goojerat; Ava; Pegu; Lucknow; South Africa 1899–1902; Relief of
  Ladysmith.

=The Rifle Brigade (the Prince Consort’s Own).=—Rifle regiments do not
possess colours.

=The London Regiment.=—

 _1st (City of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Royal Fusiliers)._

   Facings, blue. R.C.—The arms of the City of London. In each of the
   four corners the united Red and White Rose, ensigned with the
   imperial crown, within the garter, B.H.[21]—South Africa, 1900–02.

 _2nd (City of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Royal Fusiliers)._

   Facings, R.C. and B.H., as for 1st batt.

 _3rd (City of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Royal Fusiliers)._

   Facings, R.C. and B.H., as for 1st batt.

 _4th (City of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Royal Fusiliers)._

   Facings and R.C. as for 1st batt. B.H., South Africa, 1900.

 _5th (City of London) Batt. The London Regt. (London Rifle Brigade)._

   [A rifle battalion.]

 _6th (City of London) Batt. The London Regt. Rifles._

   [A rifle battalion.]

 _7th (City of London) Batt. The London Regt._

   Facings, buff. R.C.—A representation of St. Paul’s Cathedral.
   B.H.—South Africa, 1900–02. (Fig. 36.)

 _8th (City of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Post Office Rifles)._

   [A rifle battalion.]

 _9th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Queen Victoria’s
   Rifles)._

   [A rifle battalion.]

 _10th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt._

   Facings, white. The Paddington Rifles are disbanded.

 _11th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Finsbury Rifles)._

   [A rifle battalion.]

 _12th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (The Rangers)._

   Facings, scarlet. No badge. B.H.—South Africa, 1900–02.

 _13th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Kensington)._

   Facings, scarlet. R.C.—The arms of Kensington. B.H.—South Africa,
   1900–02.

 _14th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (The London Scottish)._

   Facings, blue. R.C.—In front of a circle inscribed with the motto,
   “Strike sure,” St. Andrew’s Cross, surmounted by a lion rampant.
   B.H.—South Africa, 1900–02.

 _15th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Prince of Wales’s Own.
   Civil Service Rifles)._

   [A rifle battalion.]

 _16th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Queen’s Westminster
   Rifles)._

   [A rifle battalion.]

 _17th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Poplar and Stepney
   Rifles)._

   [A rifle battalion.]

 _18th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (London Irish Rifles)._

   [A rifle battalion.]

 _19th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (St. Pancras)._

   Facings, green. R.C.—The figure of St. Pancras. B.H.—South Africa,
   1900–02.

 _20th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Blackheath and
   Woolwich)._

   Facings, black. No badge. B.H.—South Africa, 1900–02. (Fig. 40).

 _21st (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (First Surrey Rifles)._

   [A rifle battalion.]

 _22nd (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (The Queen’s)._

   Facings, blue. R.C.—The Paschal Lamb.

 _23rd (County of London) Batt. The London Regt._

   Facings, white. R.C.—An annulet ensigned with a cross pâtée and
   interlaced with a saltire conjoined in base. Motto, “Loyalty unites
   us.” B.H.—South Africa, 1900–02.

 _24th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (The Queen’s)._

   As for the 22nd battalion.

 _25th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt._

   This is a cyclist battalion.

 _26th and 27th_ do not appear in the Army List.

 _28th (County of London) Batt. The London Regt. (Artists’ Rifles)._

   No colours as a rifle battalion.

                  *       *       *       *       *

NOTE.—For reasons which every reader will appreciate the Army
Authorities have ceased to make public the changes which the war has
entailed in the numbering of battalions. On this account we have deemed
it advisable to follow the regimental records as published in the Spring
of 1914.

-----

Footnote 10:

  The Canadians have not followed this rule, for the reader may see
  examples of Arabic numerals on the colours decorating Wolfe’s monument
  in Westminster Abbey.

Footnote 11:

  New colours are now given the badge.

Footnote 12:

  i.e., Regimental colours.

Footnote 13:

  Ward Dell, in “The Regiment,” Jan. 27, 1917.

Footnote 14:

  Ward Dell, in “The Regiment,” Dec. 30, 1916.

Footnote 15:

  From “The Regiment,” Nov. 4, 1916.

Footnote 16:

  “The Regiment,” Jan. 6, 1917.

Footnote 17:

  “The Regiment,” Dec. 9, 1916.

Footnote 18:

  From the notice appearing with the exhibit at the Museum.

Footnote 19:

  Ward Dell, “The Regiment,” March 24, 1917.

Footnote 20:

  Description placed with the exhibit.

Footnote 21:

  i.e., Battle Honours.




                              CHAPTER VII
                   COLOURS OF OUR OVERSEAS DOMINIONS.


It is unnecessary here to speak of the splendid work performed by the
overseas regiments in combating the war lust of the Central European
Powers, for the fame of these gallant bodies of men is now world-wide.
Many of the units of our far-flung Empire which in 1914 were unborn or
unknown in the Mother Country are as household words to us now, and we
reckon them as much a part of the British Army as we do the Buffs or the
Black Watch. Thus it is imperative in a work of this nature to write of
the colours of our overseas as well as our home regiments.

The Army of the Indian Empire, many units of which came into such
prominence in the early part of the War, possesses a very fine array of
regimental flags. In the main these emblems follow the rules as we have
given them when dealing with the home forces. Each regimental colour,
for instance, bears a central crimson badge bearing an appropriate
device, number or title, and the whole is surmounted by the usual
imperial crown. Surrounding this is the regulation union wreath composed
of roses, thistles and shamrocks, whilst honorary distinctions are
arranged upon a circular laurel wreath, or, when few in number, on
either side of the union sprays. The ground colour of these flags is
controlled by the regimental facings in exactly the same way as they are
at home. Also, it may be said that the King’s colours are Union flags,
each with a central crimson badge.

Most of the regimental flags bear no distinctive device but a few
display a motto. The following possess one or other of these features:

=2nd Queen Victoria’s Own Rajput Light Infantry.=—Facings, blue. The
Royal and Imperial Cypher of Queen Victoria within the Garter as central
badge. Fourteen battle honours are given upon an outer laurel wreath.

=7th Duke of Connaught’s Own Rajputs.=—Facings, yellow. The Duke of
Connaught’s Crest and Cypher. Eight battle honours.

=12th Pioneers (the Kelat-i-Ghilzie Regiment).=—This unit carries a
special regimental colour, the groundwork of which is red, yellow and
blue in three horizontal bars. A mural crown superscribed “Invicta,” and
the names of eight battle honours appear on this flag. (Fig. 43).

=14th King George’s Own Ferozepore Sikhs.=—Facings, yellow. The Plume of
the Prince of Wales appears in the central badge and the Royal and
Imperial Cypher is given in each of the four comers. There are five
battle honours.

=16th Rajputs (the Lucknow Regiment).=—Facings, white. There are three
battle honours, of which one, “Lucknow,” is placed above a turreted
gateway.

[Illustration:

  COLOUR PARTY OF THE 15TH SIKHS
]

=32nd Sikh Pioneers.=—Facings, blue. No device on the central badge, but
the motto “Aut vivam inveniam aut faciam,” on a scroll beneath the union
wreath. Four battle honours are given.

=61st King George’s Own Pioneers.=—Facings, white. The Plume of the
Prince of Wales in the centre and the Royal and Imperial Cypher in each
of the four corners. Eleven battle honours appear.

=62nd Punjabis.=—Facings, emerald green. An elephant, a golden dragon
wearing an Imperial Crown and five battle honours appear on these
colours. (Fig. 44).

=63rd Palamcottah Light Infantry.=—Facings, emerald green. These colours
bear no special device, but carry the motto “Now or Never,” and seven
honorary distinctions.

=64th Pioneers.=—Facings, white. The central badge bears a numeral, but
the elephant of India is given below the union wreath. Five distinctions
appear.

=66th Punjabis.=—Facings, emerald green. A golden dragon, wearing an
Imperial Crown, and six battle honours are depicted on these colours.

=69th Punjabis.=—Facings, emerald green. A galley with the motto, in
Persian characters, signifying “By Sea and Land,” and five honours
ornament these colours.

=74th Punjabis.=—Facings, emerald green. On this flag appears a dragon
with the motto, in Persian, “Ready and True,” and six battle honours.

=83rd Wallajahbad Light Infantry.=—Facings, emerald green. The motto
“Now or Never,” and three battle honours are the distinctive features of
these colours.

=84th Punjabis.=—On an emerald green flag, the elephant of India and
three battle honours appear.

=91st Punjabis.=—The motto “Now or Never,” and two honours are given on
a cherry coloured flag.

=101st Grenadiers.=—Facings, white. The White Horse appears in the
central circle and two honours are given on the three lowest limbs of
the St. George’s Cross.

=102nd King Edward’s Own Grenadiers.=—Facings, white. The Plume of the
Prince of Wales, the Sphinx, the Royal and Imperial Cypher of King
Edward VII., and four battle honours are the special features of this
flag.

=113th Infantry.=—Facings, yellow. The Sphinx appears below the central
badge. Five honours are mentioned.

=121st Pioneers.=—Crossed axes and seven honorary distinctions are given
on a white flag bearing the red St. George’s Cross.

=127th Queen Mary’s Own Baluch Light Infantry.=—Facings, scarlet. In
each of the four corners of these colours appears the Cypher of Her
Majesty the Queen. Five battle honours.

=128th Pioneers.=—Facings, white. The motto, “Progredior,” and six
honours are the special features of this flag.

=The Canadian Military Colours= are also planned on the lines set down
for those of the Mother Country. The King’s colours are Union flags with
central badges and the regimental colours depend for their hue upon the
facings of the uniforms. The union wreaths, however, are not always of
the strict standard pattern, though they vary but slightly; also, Arabic
numerals are often used instead of Roman numerals to give the regimental
number. In a few cases, a complete departure has been made from the
regulation pattern in the case of certain regimental colours. Instead of
the union wreath, a large and beautiful maple leaf is spread across the
flag, and placed upon it centrally is a badge bearing the usual
particulars.

[Further details of the Canadian military colours are given in an
appendix at the end of this book.]

Unfortunately, there are no colours to record of the =Australian
Imperial Force=, as none of the units are in possession of these
emblems.

=The West India Regiment= is placed in the Army List almost following on
the London Regiment (Territorial Force). The facings are white and,
consequently, the regimental colours are white with the red cross of St.
George. The design follows the standard pattern of the home infantry,
and the battle honours, which testify to splendid services in various
parts of the world, are: Dominica; Martinique, 1809; Guadaloupe, 1810;
Ashantee; West Africa, 1887, 1892–3–4; Sierra Leone, 1898. The Dominica
and Sierra Leone honours refer to the French attack between 1778 and
1805. (Fig. 47).

=The King’s Own Malta Regiment of Militia.=—This regiment possesses a
King’s colour of usual type, and a regimental colour of blue material,
with a central badge bearing the Royal Cypher, surrounded by the
standard union wreath and surmounted by the imperial crown. A Maltese
Cross is placed in each of the four corners. A battle honour, “MDCCC,”
refers to the French surrender of the island to the British on September
5th, 1800.




                              CHAPTER VIII
                         MISCELLANEOUS COLOURS


Many interesting colours do not permit of classification in any of the
foregoing groups and must be described in the present chapter. The order
of Army sequence cannot, of course, be preserved in their case.

=The Honourable Artillery Company=, which figures in the Army List
directly after the Royal Garrison Artillery and immediately before the
Royal Artillery (Territorial Force), is probably one of the most
interesting units of the Army. It was first formed “about the year 1807,
in the reign of William II., as a society of armed citizens for the
protection of the goods of merchants, which were frequently commandeered
by persons who had no respect for the property of others. The date of
the incorporation of the Company is, however, 1537, when a Royal Charter
was granted by Henry VIII., under the title of the Guild of Fraternity
of St. George. This Charter gave power to the members to elect others to
serve in the ranks, and to appoint masters or officers; to use a common
seal; to make laws for the rule of the Fraternity; granted license to
use and shoot with longbows, cross-bows, and hand-guns throughout the
realm, including Calais; gave power to license all guilds of a like
nature throughout the Kingdom; and ordained that the masters or rulers
should be exempt from being empanelled on any quest or jury throughout
the realm.”[22] The regimental colour of the H.A.C. is shown in Fig. 39,
and, it is interesting to add, two retired flags may be seen in St.
Botolph Church, Bishopsgate.

=The Royal Marine Light Infantry= has a very fine blue regimental
colour. The Globe forms the central badge, and this is surrounded by a
green laurel wreath with the imperial crown above. Placed between the
crown and the Globe is an anchor ornamented with the Royal Cypher. In
the dexter canton is a small Union flag, whilst the Royal Cypher figures
in the remaining three. The motto, “Per Mare, Per Terram,” which
testifies to the world-wide influence of this fighting force, and the
battle honour, “Gibraltar,” figure on two golden scrolls. The honour is
also inscribed on the King’s colour. (Fig. 45).

=The Royal Militia of the Island of Jersey= has an artillery section and
three battalions of light infantry. The latter have colours, the 1st and
3rd battalions of which are identical except for the necessary
difference of wording. In both cases the material is blue and the
central badge consists of the three lions of England. The union wreath
and the imperial crown appear as on the home infantry colours. The
battle honour, “Jersey, 1781,” refers to the French attack organised by
Baron de Rullecour, and successfully met by this regiment under the
command of Major Pierson. A small Union flag is shown in the dexter
canton.

[Illustration:

  =41.= Guidon of the Essex Yeomanry.
]

[Illustration:

  =42.= Guidon of the 2nd County of London Yeomanry (Westminster
    Dragoons).
]

[Illustration:

  =43.= Special Regimental Colour of the 12th Pioneers (The
    Kelat-i-Ghilzie Regiment), Indian Army.
]

[Illustration:

  =44.= Regimental Colour of the 62nd Punjabis, Indian Army.
]

[Illustration:

  =45.= Colour of the Royal Marine Light Infantry.
]

[Illustration:

  =46.= King’s Colour of the Royal Guernsey Militia (2nd Battalion).
]

[Illustration:

  =47.= Regimental Colour of the West India Regiment (2nd Battalion).
]

[Illustration:

  =48.= Colour of the Royal Military College, Sandhurst.
]

               PLATE 6. MISCELLANEOUS GUIDONS AND COLOURS

The colour of the second battalion varies but slightly from the others.
The badge is a shield and not circular, a horn with the figure “2” is
placed above the badge, and the union wreath is not of the standard
pattern. The King’s colours in each case follow the usual type.

=The Royal Militia of Guernsey= possesses an artillery unit and two
battalions of light infantry. Each of these latter has a blue regimental
colour, bearing the three lions of England, with a sprig above, for the
central badge and a laurel instead of the union wreath. There is no
union flag on the regimental colour but the King’s colour reveals it
according to rule. (Fig. 46).

=Royal Military College, Sandhurst.=—This school possesses a King’s
colour of the usual infantry type and a blue colour of the regimental
type. The central badge of both is the Royal Cypher. The latter reveals
it surrounded by the union wreath and surmounted by the imperial crown.
The Motto “Vires acquirit eundo,” appear on a gilt scroll. (Fig. 48).

In all the above cases, the lion and crown surmount the pole, and
fringe, tassels, and cords follow the type used for the regular
infantry.

-----

Footnote 22:

  Ralph Nevill. British Military Prints.




                               CHAPTER IX
                             BATTLE HONOURS


Battle honours, or honorary distinctions as they are officially termed,
form so important a part of the embellishments of regimental colours
that it is necessary before concluding to give some short account of
them. The reader must not expect in the following pages to find a
complete history of every event, for such would fill many volumes; all
that is aimed at is to give a few salient facts, such as will recall to
mind the stirring deeds for which the battle honours stand.

In previous chapters we have given the honours accorded to each
regiment, but it may be well to point out that some regiments possess
honours which do not figure on their colours. Also, we may add, some
battalions fly colours with honours not really won by them. This happens
where two regiments have been amalgamated. In such cases, the unit which
becomes the second battalion gives its distinctions to the first
battalion and _vice versâ_. It is thus clear that regiments which are
composed of two old regiments may have their honour rolls considerably
lengthened by the process of amalgamation. For this reason, it is not
always a fair test to judge the glory of a regiment by the number of
distinctions which it owns. On this and other accounts, we have
carefully refrained from giving a list of the various Army units ranged
in order as indicated by their honours. All that we shall say on this
matter is that the King’s Royal Rifle Corps, were we to compile such a
list, would take first place and, unfortunately, it has no colours on
which to display its fine prowess.

  =Abu Klea.=—Battle fought on January 17th, 1885, by a small British
  army during the unsuccessful endeavour to reach Gordon in Khartoum.
  Colonel Burnaby was killed and the British square broken but
  reformed and the Mahdi’s tribesmen were beaten off.

  =Abyssinia.=—This expedition was directed against Theodore, the
  Negus of Abyssinia, who seized the British subjects resident in his
  territory, because the English had refused to share in his quarrels
  with the Egyptians.

  =Aden.=—Captured from the Arabians in 1839 by the British.

  =Affghanistan, 1839.=—An expedition to place the ex-king
  Shah-Soojah, on the Afghan throne; led by Sir John Keane.

  =Afghanistan, 1878–80.=—To avenge the murder of Sir L. Cavagnari,
  and to secure the passes overlooking the valley of the Punjab from
  being perpetually harassed, Lord Roberts, V.C., advanced on Cabul
  and fought a number of successful engagements.

  =Ahmad Khel.=—During Sir D. Stewart’s march from Kandahar to Ghuznee
  and then on to join Lord Roberts, he encountered a force of Ghazis
  at Ahmad Khel and secured a victory over them.

  =Albuhera.=—Probably the hardest fought battle of the Peninsular
  War. Marshal Beresford attempted to prevent Soult from advancing to
  the relief of besieged Badajoz. The Middlesex Regiment here earned
  its name of the “Diehards” and a desperate charge of the Royal
  Fusiliers turned the day, and “fifteen hundred unwounded men, the
  remnant of six thousand unconquerable British soldiers, stood
  triumphant on the fatal field.” (Napier).

  =Ali Masjid.=—A fort attacked by a column under General Sir S.
  Browne, at the opening of the Afghan War, 1878.

  =Aliwal.=—One of the battles of the first Sikh War.

  =Ally Ghur.=—The first engagement in the Mahratta War. (September
  4th, 1803).

  =Alma.=—The first battle of the Crimean War. Here the British and
  French landed and successfully stormed the heights. R. Gibb’s famous
  picture, “Forward 42nd,” refers to this battle.

  =Almaraz.=—A defeat for the English in Spain by Louis XIV. during
  the War of the Spanish Succession.

  =Amboyna.=—An island in the Moluccas, where disputes with the native
  and English traders has led to a series of unfortunate differences
  with Holland, to whom it belongs.

  =Arcot.=—A fort in the Carnatic held by Clive. By making it a
  stronghold he was able to draw Dupleix from the hard pressed
  garrison in Trinchinopoly, and thus relieve, in a measure, its
  vicissitudes.

  =Arroyo dos Molinos.=—One of the lesser engagements in the
  Peninsular War, in which the Border Regiment outflanked a French
  regiment and took prisoners the men of a whole battalion.

  =Ashantee, 1873–4.=—The Dutch gave to the British all their rights
  in this country in exchange for territory in Sumatra. The native
  king raised certain objections and also treated British missionaries
  in a cruel manner. Human sacrifices were among his abominable
  practices. When the British Government demanded that he should rule
  decently, he declared war.

  =Atbara.=—A prelude to the Battle of Omdurman, fought against the
  Dervishes on Good Friday, 1898.

  =Ava.=—Near this town the last fighting in the first Burmese War
  took place. (February, 1826).

  =Badajoz.=—A strong fortress in Spain taken by us from the French,
  by assault, during the Peninsular War, 1812.

  =Badara.=—A British victory which terminated Dutch influence in
  India.

  =Balaklava.=—(October 26th, 1854). A battle in the Crimean War
  resulting from Mentschikoff’s attempt to get to the coast and so cut
  off the British from their base. Noted for the stand of the “thin
  red line,” i.e., 93rd Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, and the
  desperate charges of the “Heavy and Light” Brigades of Cavalry.

  =Banda.=—Islands in the Malay Archipelago which have been twice
  taken from the Dutch and twice restored to them.

  =Barrosa.=—(March 5th, 1811). A battle in the Peninsular War in
  which we suffered serious losses owing to the incapacity of the
  Spanish general, La Peña. His army looked on while 4,000 British
  defeated 9,000 French.

  =Beaumont.=—Battle fought near Cambrai and Le Cateau, during the
  campaign of 1794. A dense fog enabled our troops to surprise the
  French with a resulting gain for us.

  =Bhurtpore.=—A very powerful fortress in Rajputana. General Lake had
  failed to capture it in 1805 and it was considered by the Indians to
  be impregnable. The British had guaranteed the throne to the
  rightful heir, but his uncle usurped it, and war followed. It was
  brilliantly taken by assault in 1826 and its capture did much to
  establish our reputation in India.

  =Bladensburg.=—An action in the great American War which took place
  on August 24th, 1814.

  =Blenheim.=—(August 13th, 1704). One of the greatest of Britain’s
  victories; fought by Marlborough to prevent the capture of Vienna by
  the Marshals of the French King, Louis XIV., and the Bavarians.

  =Bourbon.=—A French island, near Mauritius, taken by the British
  during the Peninsular War in order that our shipping might be
  protected from enemy raiding vessels which issued from the island
  harbours.

  =Burma, 1885–87.=—A war occasioned by the treatment with which the
  native King Theebaw harassed British traders.

  =Busaco.=—(September 27th, 1810). A battle fought just prior to
  Wellington’s withdrawal to the lines of Torres Vedras.

  =Bushire.=—One of the battles of the Persian War, 1856–7.

  =Buxar.=—The army of Oude was defeated by Munro here on October
  23rd, 1764.

  =Cabool, 1842.=—Town in Afghanistan entered by General Pollock after
  he had defeated Mahomed Akbar Khan.

  =Candahar, 1842.=—The stronghold of General Nott during the Afghan
  War. He advanced from this town to assist General Pollock and found
  him in Cabul, where the British flag was flying victoriously.

  =Canton.=—Bogue Forts surrendered to Sir Hugh Gough in the first
  China War, 1841. Bombarded in 1857 after the “Arrow” incident.

  =Cape of Good Hope, 1806.=—Date of British occupation; formerly in
  possession of the Dutch.

  =Carnatic.=—Hyder Ali invaded this southern portion of Hindostan
  with 80,000 troops in 1780, and was thrown back by Sir Eyre Coote in
  the following year, but completely defeated in 1782. Tippoo Sahib
  overran this district in 1790, but with little success to his
  credit.

  =Central India.=—Refers to the fighting, under Lord Straithnairn,
  which took place during the first six months of 1858, following on
  the Indian Mutiny. [Statue in Knightsbridge bears on this campaign.]

  =Charasiah.=—Lord Roberts met the Afghans here and routed
  them, 1879, after an outrage had been committed on British
  plenipotentiaries in Cabul.

  =Chillianwallah.=—A bloody encounter of the second Punjab War
  (January 13th, 1849), in which the 24th Regiment (South Wales
  Borderers) lost heavily.

  =Chitral.=—Sir George Robertson’s campaign against Umra Khan and
  Amir-ul-Mulk, when the latter murdered his brother, whom the British
  considered to be the rightful ruler.

  =Ciudad Rodrigo.=—A siege of the Peninsular War, January, 1812.

  =Condore.=—An Indian engagement in which the British, under Ford,
  met the French, under Conflans. By misleading the French, Ford was
  able to entice them to charge and then brought into action a
  regiment of British soldiers which had been hidden in a field of
  Indian corn. The result was a victory for the British.

  =Copenhagen.=—The occasion when Nelson placed a telescope to his
  glass eye and claimed that he could not see Sir Hyde Parker’s signal
  to cease the action. (April 2nd, 1801).

  =Corunna.=—Here, after Sir John Moore’s masterly retreat, was fought
  the battle which permitted the British to embark in safety. Moore
  was killed in this Peninsular battle.

  =Defence of Kimberley.=—A siege of the Boer War lasting 123 days.
  The town was relieved by Lord French on February 15th, 1900.

  =Defence of Ladysmith.=—A siege of the Boer War, lasting 121 days.
  The town was relieved by Sir Redvers Buller on February 28th, 1900.

  =Deig.=—A battle of the Mahratta War, 1804.

  =Delhi, 1857.=—The stronghold of the rebels during the Indian
  Mutiny; besieged and stormed against desperate odds by Sir John
  Nicholson’s troops.

  =Detroit.=—In 1812, an American army crossed into Upper Canada, but
  met a force under Major-General Brock which necessitated its
  retirement to Fort Detroit. Brock invested the fort and demanded its
  surrender, which ensued on August 16th.

  =Dettingen.=—One of the battles of the War of the Austrian
  Succession. (June 27th, 1743). Last battle at which a King of
  England (George II.) commanded.

  =Douro.=—A Peninsular battle fought on May 12th, 1809, by
  Wellington. The River Douro was crossed in the face of strong
  opposition and the French defeated.

  =Egmont-op-Zee.=—One of the battles of the Napoleonic War; took
  place in Holland, 1799.

  =Egypt, 1882–84.=—A campaign which owed its inception to the
  rebellion of Arabi Pasha, whose object was to rob Prince Twefik of
  his position as khedive and to repudiate the treaty obligations and
  debts of Egypt.

  =Emsdorff.=—The 15th Hussars were allowed to wear the following
  inscription on their helmets, bearing on this battle honour: “Five
  battalions of Foot defeated and taken by this Regiment, with their
  colours, and nine pieces of cannon, at Emsdorff, 16th July, 1760.”

  =Ferozeshah.=—A two days’ fight during the Sikh War (December
  21st-22nd, 1845).

  =Fuentes d’Onor.=—One of the Peninsular battles, fought by
  Wellington to bar the way to Almeida which Massena was endeavouring
  to reach. (May 5th, 1811).

  =Ghuznee.=—Besieged during the Afghan War, 1839; the enemy forces
  were commanded by the notorious Hyder Khan. Later, the town was
  recaptured by the Afghans and the British inside it massacred. The
  British, however, took it once more in September, 1842.

  =Gibraltar, 1704–5.=—British attacked it under the command of Sir
  George Rooke, Sir John Leake and Admiral Byng on July 21st, 1704,
  and took it three days later. During the month of October it was
  besieged by large forces of Spaniards and French, but the handful of
  British held out and Sir John Leake raised the siege in March, 1705.

  =Gibraltar, 1779–83.=—General Eliot was besieged by overwhelming
  forces of French and Spaniards. His “red-hot potatoes” and other
  novel devices caused terrific havoc among the enemy and the blockade
  ceased on February 5th, 1783, wholly in our favour.

  =Goojerat.=—The last battle of the second Punjab Campaign. (February
  22nd, 1849).

  =Guadaloupe, 1759–1810.=—An island in the Antilles belonging to the
  French. Captured from them in 1759 but returned to them in 1763.
  Taken from them a second time in 1794 and returned in 1803. Again
  taken in 1810. Became a possession of Sweden in 1813. Now French.

  =Guzerat.=—See Goojerat.

  =Hafir.=—A battle of the Dongola expedition. (September 29th, 1896).
  The precursor of our fresh advance under Kitchener to reconquer the
  Soudan.

  =Havannah.=—Captured by the Earl of Albemarle in 1762.

  =Hyderabad.=—A battle of the War of Scinde, occasioned largely by
  the temerity of the ameers who had taken note of our reverses in
  Afghanistan. Under Sir Charles Napier, our forces were victorious
  (1843) and he is credited with having sent home the terse message
  “Peccavi,” which means “I have sinned” (Scinde).

  =Inkerman.=—A battle of the Crimean War fought, in a fog, on
  November 5th, 1854.

  =Java.=—When Napoleon obtained power over Holland, it became
  necessary for the British to turn their attentions to the Dutch
  colonies. Accordingly, an expedition was directed against Java,
  which we occupied in 1811.

  =Kabul, 1879.=—See Afghanistan, 1878–80.

  =Kandahar, 1880.=—See Afghanistan, 1878–80. Lord Roberts’ army made
  a wonderful march through mountainous country from Cabul to Kandahar
  to avenge our defeat at Maiwand.

  =Khartoum.=—This honour was awarded to the regiments which fought in
  the battle of Khartoum following on the success at Omdurman in
  September, 1898.

  =Khelat.=—A hill fort and capital of Baluchistan, invested by the
  Ghilzees in 1842, and commanded by Captain Craigie.

  =Kirbekan.=—A battle of the Sudan Campaign, in which Major-General
  Earle, commanding the force journeying up the Nile, was killed.

  =Kirkee.=—Lord Hastings’ defeat of the Pindarries, a horde of
  freebooters, on November 5th, 1817.

  =Koosh-ab.=—The Persians defeated by the English on December 10th,
  1856.

  =Leswarree.=—A great victory for General Lake in the Mahratta War
  (November 1st, 1803).

  =Lincelles.=—General Lake defeated the French (August 18th, 1793).

  =Louisburg.=—Captured on July 26th, 1753, by Amherst, Wolfe and
  Boscawen.

  =Lucknow.=—Besieged in 1857–8. An heroic defence was made by Sir
  Henry Lawrence.

  =Maharajpore.=—Lord Gough defeated the Maharattas, December 20th,
  1843.

  =Maheidpoor.=—Sir Thomas Hislop defeated the Pindarries on December
  21st, 1817.

  =Maida.=—Stuart routed the French, July 4th, 1806.

  =Malplaquet.=—One of Marlborough’s victories, September 11th, 1709.

  =Mangalore.=—The Mysore War terminated by the Treaty of Mangalore,
  by which Tippoo was recognised as sultan of the Carnatic Balaghaut
  and the English were entrusted with the protection of Travancore.

  =Martinique.=—An island in the Caribbean Sea which has seen
  encounters between the British and French in 1762, 1794, and 1809.

  =Masulipatam.=—This refers to a mutiny of troops of the Madras
  European Regiment during the month of May, 1809.

  =Meeanee.=—Sir Charles Napier defeated the Ameers on February 17th,
  1843.

  =Minden.=—Defeat of the French, August 1st, 1759, during the Seven
  Years’ War.

  =Modder River.=—An engagement which occasioned a heavy list of
  casualties, fought by Lord Methuen on November 28th, 1899. Later,
  Lord Roberts, V.C., met the Boers here on February 9th, 1900.

  =Monte Video.=—Taken February 3rd, 1807; afterwards returned to
  Spain.

  =Moodkee.=—Lord Hardinge defeated the Sikhs December 18th, 1845.

  =Mooltan.=—Besieged during the second Punjab Campaign. The Sikhs
  were repulsed November 7th, 1848.

  =Mysore.=—See Mangalore.

  =Nagpore.=—Captured by the British, November 26th, 1807.

  =Namur, 1695.=—Then a strong fortress; taken by William III. from
  the French at the close of his brilliant campaign in the Low
  Countries.

  =New Zealand.=—Trouble in 1844 arose from the murder of British
  settlers by a native chief, Hone Heke.

  =Niagara.=—The English took this fort on July 24th, 1759; there was
  also another engagement against the Americans in 1812.

  =Nieuport.=—A centre of attack on the French army during the
  revolutionary war, 1793.

  =Nile, 1884–85.=—The campaign which was directed against the Mahdi
  to rescue General Gordon. We failed to reach Khartoum in time and
  Gordon perished.

  =Nive.=—Several encounters took place here between the British and
  the French. (December 10th-13th, 1813).

  =Nivelle.=—Soult defeated by Wellington whose strategy forced the
  former to retire to Bayonne. (November 10th, 1813).

  =North America, 1763–64.=—This battle honour refers to the fighting
  between the British, under Colonel Bradstreet, and certain Indian
  tribes.

  =Nundy-droog.=—A stronghold near Bangalore, assaulted by Cornwallis,
  which fell after a three weeks’ siege. (October, 1791).

  =Orthes.=—Wellington defeated Soult, February 27th, 1814.

  =Oudenarde.=—A Marlborough victory in Belgium. (July 11th, 1708).

  =Paardeberg.=—A battle of the Boer war in which Lord French beat
  Cronje and forced him to surrender a few days later (February 18th,
  1900), on the anniversary of our defeat at Majuba, during the first
  Boer war.

  =Pegu.=—An issue of the second Burmese War, 1852.

  =Peiwar Kotal.=—One of the attacks of the Afghan War, 1878–80,
  successfully carried out by Lord Roberts, V.C.

  =Pekin, 1860.=—The “Arrow” incident brought matters to a head and
  the second Chinese War began in 1857. Owing to the massacre of
  English residents, Pekin was occupied by British and French troops
  and the famous Summer Palace razed to the ground.

  =Pekin, 1900.=—This refers to the Boxer rising.

  =Peninsula.=—The campaign between the British and French; under the
  leadership of the Duke of Wellington.

  =Persia.=—A war which sprang from the relations of Persia and Russia
  and comprised the engagements of Reshire, Bushire, Koosh-ab, etc.
  1856–7.

  =Plassey.=—Here Clive, to avenge the “Black Hole of Calcutta,”
  defeated the Nabob of Bengal, Surajah Dowlah, on June 23rd, 1757.
  Probably in no important battle have we met greater odds, which were
  nearly fifty to one. From this battle dates our paramount position
  in India. There was a prophecy that the “British Raj,” or rule, in
  India would last a century, and the Mutiny broke out in 1857.

  =Pondicherry.=—A French colony which has seen much fighting. The
  Dutch took it in 1693, but it came into French possession once more
  in 1697. In 1761, the British took it and restored it in 1763; took
  it again in 1778; French again possessed it in 1783 by the terms of
  the Treaty of Versailles; later, the British also took it in 1793
  and in 1803.

  =Punjaub.=—The second Sikh war, a campaign necessitated by the
  murder of British officials on their arrival at the fortress of
  Mooltan where they were about to take up their appointments, 1848.

  =Punniar.=—One of the two successful battles fought in the Gwalior
  Campaign, 1843.

  =Pyrenees.=—Soult defeated by Wellington, July 28th, 1813.

  =Quebec, 1759.=—Wolfe was victorious but mortally wounded, September
  13th. This success secured for us Canada from the French.

  =Queenstown.=—Americans who had invaded Canada were defeated October
  13th, 1812.

  =Ramillies.=—The French defeated by Marlborough, May 23rd, 1706.

  =Relief of Kimberley.=—Boer War, February 15th, 1900.

  =Relief of Ladysmith.=—Boer War, February 28th, 1900.

  =Reshire.=—See Persia.

  =Rohilcund.=—A settlement of the Rohilla tribe, from Afghanistan, in
  North East India. They owed money to the Sultan of Oude, and as
  payment was refused, the latter obtained the use of a British force,
  lent by Warren Hastings, and conquered the settlement. Burke claims
  that Hastings was to be condemned for lending the force for such
  purposes.

  =Roliga.=—Often written “Roleria,” one of the first battles of the
  Peninsular War, August 9th, 1808.

  =Sahagun.=—Sir John Moore checked Soult here on December 20th, 1808.

  =St. Lucia.=—An island in the Windward group which has suffered much
  change of possession. By the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, 1748, it
  became neutral; became French in 1756; taken by British in 1778;
  given to the French in 1783 for Grenada; taken by British in 1794
  and again in 1796 by Sir Ralph Abercromby. By the Treaty of Amiens,
  given to the French in 1802; taken from them by the British in 1803.

  =St. Sebastian.=—Stormed by Graham, August 31st, 1813.

  =St. Vincent.=—The reference is to the defeat of the Spanish fleet
  on February 14th, 1797. This honour is possessed by the Welsh
  Regiment and was won when they were serving as Marines on board the
  “Agamemnon.”

  =Salamanca.=—Wellington defeated Marmont, on Sunday, July 22nd,
  1812.

  =Scinde.=—See Hyderabad.

  =Seringapatam.=—Besieged by Lord Cornwallis in 1762 and later by
  Lord Wellesley in 1799 owing to the hostile attitude of Tippoo
  Sahib. Tippoo was killed May 4th.

  =Sevastopol.=—The siege of, commenced October 17th, 1854, against
  the Russians. Its capture completed the Crimean War.

  =Sholinghur.=—A strong position taken up by Hyder Ali from which he
  was dislodged by Sir Eyre Coote in September, 1781.

  =Sobraon.=—Gough defeated the Sikhs, February 10th, 1846.

  =South Africa.=—1834–5, the first Kaffir War; 1846–7, engagements
  against the Gaikas; 1851–3, a third Kaffir rising led by Sandilli.
  (The “Birkenhead” was carrying troops to take part in this war when
  it foundered). 1878–9, the Zulu War; 1899–1902, the Boer War.

  =Suakin, 1885.=—Defended by military and naval forces in 1884–85
  against the troops of the Mahdi and Osman Digna.

  =Surinam.=—Taken from the Dutch in 1799 and again in 1804, but
  restored to them later.

  =Taku Forts.=—After the Chinese ignored the Treaty of Tientsin the
  Taku Forts were stormed, 1860.

  =Talavera.=—Wellington defeated Victor on July 27–28, 1809.

  =Tangier, 1662–80.=—Given to the British by the Portuguese in 1662,
  as a dowry, when Charles II. married Catherine of Braganza. The 2nd,
  or Queen’s Regiment (Kirk’s Lambs), was raised to garrison it.

  =Tarifa.=—The most southerly town in Europe, south of Gibraltar. The
  French attacked the British there in 1811–2.

  =Tel-el-Kebir.=—This was the important engagement after the
  bombardment of Alexandria, during the Egyptian campaign, (q.v.) It
  took place on September 13th, 1882; after a trying night march of
  Sir G. Wolseley’s men through the desert the Egyptian encampment was
  rushed at dawn.

  =Ternate.=—A small Dutch island in the Malay Archipelago. It was the
  scene of fighting during the Napoleonic war. Lord Minto was in
  command.

  =Tirah.=—A N.W. frontier campaign in India, in the years 1897–8.

  =Tofrek.=—A battle of the Sudan campaign which followed shortly
  after the fall of Khartoum. (March 22nd, 1885).

  =Toulouse.=—Wellington defeated Soult. (April 10th, 1814).

  =Tournay.=—In southern Belgium, the scene of much fighting and some
  sieges during the years 1793–4.

  =Villers-en-Cauchies.=—The British and Germans met the French here
  in 1794. The Emperor Frances II. of Germany was on the point of
  being taken prisoner when the 15th Light Dragoons rescued him.

  =Vimiera.=—An early battle of the Peninsular War. Wellesley defeated
  Junot. (August 21st, 1808).

  =Vittoria.=—Wellington defeated King Joseph. (June 21st, 1813). The
  greatest of our victories during the Peninsular War.

  =Wandiwash.=—Sir Eyre Coote defeated Lally in India; an engagement
  of the Seven Years’ War. (January 22nd, 1760).

  =Warburg.=—The Prince of Brunswick defeated the French. (July 31st,
  1760).

  =Waterloo.=—(June 18th, 1815). The battle in which Napoleon was
  finally overthrown and which restored peace to Europe after the long
  revolutionary and Napoleonic wars which had lasted a quarter of a
  century.

  =Wilhelmstahl.=—Defeat of the French, 1762.

  =Willems.=—The Guards, Dragoons, Lancers, etc., have this honour; it
  is “Wilhelmstahl” on the colours of the line regiments.

  =April 12th, 1782.=—Rodney’s naval victory over De Grasse.

  =June 1st, 1794.=—(The Glorious First of June). Lord Howe’s naval
  victory.




                                APPENDIX
           REGIMENTAL COLOURS OF CANADIAN INFANTRY BATTALIONS


=13th Battalion “Royal Highlanders of Canada.”=

Colours presented in Canada and deposited in St. Paul’s Church,
Montreal.

=21st Battalion “Eastern Ontario.”=

Colours presented by Veterans of Kingston, Ontario; brought to England
and now in custody of the High Commissioner of Canada.

=22nd Battalion=

Colours in Notre Dame Cathedral, Montreal.

=33rd Battalion=

Made and presented by I.O.D.E., London, Ontario, July 21st, 1915;
accompanied the unit to England and deposited in Canterbury Cathedral on
Aug. 26th, 1916.

=38th Battalion=

Colours presented on Aug. 1st, 1915, by the Home-Guard. Deposited in
Westminster Abbey for duration of war.

=39th Battalion=

Colours made in England and donated to the Battalion by the Women’s
Canadian Club, Belleville, Ont., in June, 1915. Presentation made by
General Sir Sam Hughes. In Aug., 1915, deposited in Lydd Parish Church,
Kent, but were reclaimed in March, 1917, and returned to Canada.

=45th Battalion=

Colours made by Mrs. Clark, wife of the Commanding Officer, and
presented by her at Brandon, Manitoba, in 1916.

=49th Battalion=

Colours deposited in Canterbury Cathedral.

=50th Battalion=

Deposited in Parish Church, Bramshott, Hants.

=51st Battalion=

Made by the Ladies of the Conservative Assoc. of Alberta; presented to
Battalion by the President of the Association, Mrs. A. E. Ewing; were
carried on parade, July 1st, 1915; on July 21st, 1916, were deposited in
Westminster Abbey.

=59th Battalion=

Colours presented to Battalion by Mr. Richard Waldron, of Kingston,
Ontario; handed to Battalion by Mrs. Waldron in presence of Sir Sam
Hughes, Oct. 5th, 1915, at Kingston, Ont.

=63rd Battalion=

Colours accompanied Unit to England; were later returned to Canada and
placed in an Edmonton Church.

=66th Battalion=

Colours subscribed for by Citizens of Edmonton, Canada, and presented in
Dec., 1915, at Edmonton, by Major Henry. Now in St. Paul’s Cathedral.

=68th Battalion=

Colours presented to Unit by Ladies’ Auxiliary Society, formed by wives
of the officers. Presented at Westcana Park, Regina, shortly before Unit
left for England. Now deposited in Canterbury Cathedral.

=69th “French Canadian” Battalion.=

Colours made by ladies of Montreal, but not finished in time to be
presented to Battalion before it left for England. Now deposited in St.
James’s Cathedral, Montreal.

=70th Battalion=

Colours presented by the Sportsmen’s Patriotic Society of London, Ont.,
Feb. 17th, 1917, and deposited in Westminster Abbey on Aug. 14th, 1916,
for duration of war.

=75th Mississauga Battalion=

Colours deposited in Westminster Abbey.

=76th Battalion=

Colours presented by the Public Schools of Simcoe County, Ont., and
deposited in the Methodist Church, Georgetown, Ont.

=77th “Ottawa” Battalion=

Colours given by Mrs. Thomas Ahearn, the President, the Directors and
Employees of the Ottawa Light, Heat, and Power Company, with which
Company Col. Street has been connected for many years. Presented on June
8th, 1915, by General Sir Sam Hughes; now deposited in Westminster
Abbey.

=80th Battalion=

Regimental colours presented by the Ketcheson family on July 20th,
presentation being made by Miss Nelly Ketcheson, daughter of the Mayor
of Belleville, Ont.

=81st Battalion=

Colours left in Canada when Battalion embarked for England.

=85th “Nova Scotia Highland” Battalion.=

Colours made by Lady Borden, and presented to the Battalion, Sept. 25th,
1916; deposited in Parish Church, Witley.

=86th Battalion=

Colours donated by Mrs. Sandford; presented by Lady Aberdeen, on May
16th, 1916; deposited in Canterbury Cathedral on Oct. 21st, 1916.

=87th Battalion “Canadian Grenadier Guards.”=

Colours deposited in Canterbury Cathedral.

=91st Battalion=

Colours deposited in Canterbury Cathedral.

=92nd Battalion=

Colours of the parent Militia Regiment, “48th Highlanders of Toronto.”

=98th Battalion=

Colours presented by Citizens and School Children of Niagara Falls; not
finished in time to be brought to England with Battalion; now deposited
in the Armouries at Niagara Falls.

=99th Battalion=

Colours deposited in Windsor Parish Church, England; presented to
Battalion by the Daughters of the Empire, Windsor, Ont.

=100th Battalion “Winnipeg Grenadiers.”=

Colours deposited in Canterbury Cathedral, March 2nd, 1917.

=104th Battalion=

Colours deposited in St. Paul’s Cathedral.

=108th Battalion=

Colours donated by the ladies of Ottawa; presented by Lady Borden, wife
of the Prime Minister, on Sept. 5th, 1916.

=109th Battalion=

Colours donated and presented by Lady Eaton, in presence of Sir Sam
Hughes, on May 24th, 1916.

=111th Battalion=

Colours presented by the Ladies of South Waterloo County through the
Daughters of the Empire, Galt, Ont. Deposited in Trinity Church, Galt,
Ont.

=112th Battalion=

Colours made by Miss Pratt, of Windsor, Nova Scotia, and presented to
the Battalion by Mrs. Tremain, wife of the O.C., July 21st, 1916;
deposited in Christ Church, Windsor, N.S., Canada, on following day.

=115th Battalion=

Colours left in Canada.

=116th Battalion=

Colours presented by Junior Relief Club, of Uxbridge, Ont., on May 20th,
1916; presentation made by James Godfrey, K.C., of Toronto, on May 20th,
1916. Deposited in Westminster Abbey on Oct. 7th, 1916.

=117th Battalion=

Colours made in Montreal, and presented by the Eastern Township Board of
Trade, of Sherbrooke, May 29th, 1916.

=120th Battalion=

This Battalion has the colours of the 13th Royal Regiment of Hamilton,
Ont.

=123rd Battalion=

Was presented with colours of 10th Royal Grenadiers, its parent
regiment, on May 7th, 1916. Now deposited in Church of All Saints,
Witley, Surrey.

=124th Battalion=

Colours presented by Toronto Open Air Horse Parade Association, in
Toronto, July 1st, 1916. Now deposited in Witley Church, Surrey.

=125th Battalion=

Colours presented by Mrs. Cockshutt, wife of the Hon. Colonel of the
Battalion, at Brantford, Ont., May 17th, 1916, deposited in Parish
Church, Chart, Surrey, May 12th, 1917. They were carried in honour of
the Queen Mother in London on May 11th, 1917.

=127th Battalion=

Regimental colours of the 12th Regiment of the York Rangers; now
deposited in Trinity Church, Aurora, Ont.

=128th Battalion=

These colours were made by an invalid lady of Moose Jaw, Mrs. Eleanor
Lane; presented by the Lieut.-Governor of Saskatchewan, on May 1st,
1916, and for nearly a year took their prominent place on ceremonial
parades of the Battalion. Deposited in Bristol Cathedral, England, on
March 11th, 1917.

=130th Battalion=

Colours presented by Independent Order of the Daughters of the Empire,
Perth Chapter, Perth, Ont., on May 21st, 1915; deposited in St. James’
Church, Perth, Ont., on Sept. 10th, 1916.

=132nd Battalion=

Colours presented by Earl of Chatham, Chapter of the I.O.D.E. of
Chatham, N.B., on Aug. 1st, 1916; consecrated by Venerable Archdeacon
Forsyth, of Chatham; deposited in Westminster Abbey.

=133rd Battalion=

Colours given by Norfolk Branch, Daughters of the Empire; presented by
Sir John Hurdrie, Lieut.-Governor of Province of Ontario, July 7th,
1916; deposited in the County Council Chambers, Simcoe, Ont.

=135th Battalion=

Colours presented to Battalion by Dr. H. A. McCallam on June 27th, 1916;
brought to England, but later returned to Canada, and deposited in the
Anglican Church, Strathroy, Ont.

=136th Battalion=

Colours presented to Battalion by Col. J. L. Hughes, of Toronto, at Port
Hope, Ont., in July, 1916; deposited in St. Mark’s Church, Port Hope, on
Sept. 18th, 1916.

=137th Battalion=

Colours presented by Military Chapter of the I.O.D.E. on Aug. 12th,
1916; now deposited in Westminster Abbey.

=138th Battalion=

Colours made by an invalid lady in Edmonton, and presented by A. J.
Ewing, Esq., K.C., M.P.P., and Mrs. Ewing, of Edmonton, on July 1st,
1916. They are to be deposited in Edmonton.

=139th Battalion=

Colours presented by the citizens of the Town of Coburg, May 27th, 1916;
deposited in St. Peter’s Church, Coburg, Ont.

=142nd Battalion=

Colours made by Messrs. Ryrie Brothers, Toronto, and presented by Sir
Adam and Lady Beck, of London, Ont., on Aug. 19th, 1916; deposited in
St. Paul’s Cathedral, London, Ont.

=146th Battalion=

Colours presented by citizens of Kingston, Ont.; deposited in St.
Andrew’s Church, Kingston, Ont.

=147th Battalion=

Colours made by Messrs. Robert Simpson & Co., as a gift from the County
of Gray; presented by Mr. A. E. Cordingely, on Aug. 22nd, 1916; now
deposited at Newcastle-on-Tyne.

=148th Battalion=

Colours made and presented by Mrs. Gavin Ogilvie, in March, 1917; they
are to be deposited in Redpath Library, McGill University.

=151st Battalion=

Colours presented by Mr. Blair, Provost, Alberta; deposited in the
Parliament Buildings of the Province of Alberta, at Edmonton.

=152nd Battalion=

Colours presented by the Daughters of the Empire, Weyburn, July 22nd,
1916. Deposited in Canterbury Cathedral.

=154th Battalion=

Colours presented at Cornwall County, Ont., Aug. 24th, 1916, by the
Ladies of St. Lawrence Chapter of the I.O.D.E. Presentation made by the
Regent of the Chapter; colours now with the Battalion.

=155th Battalion=

Colours presented by the Argyll Chapter of the I.O.D.E., July 29th,
1916, at Belleville, Ont., returned to Canada for deposit in St. Thomas’
Church, Belleville, Ont.

=157th Battalion=

Colours presented by the Teachers of South Simcoe, on Oct. 12th, 1916.

=159th Battalion=

Colours deposited in Westminster Abbey.

=160th Battalion=

Colours presented by Mr. M. A. Hallidey, Chesley, Ont., June 3rd, 1916,
Premier Hearst and Lieut.-Col. Rev. Dr. Johnstone, officiating.

=161st Battalion=

Colours made and presented by the Daughters of the Empire, Exeter, Ont.;
deposited in the Court House at Goderich, Ont.

=169th Battalion=

Colours presented by the Women’s Auxiliary, on Oct. 5th, 1916; deposited
in Church of the Ascension, Toronto, Ont.

=173rd Battalion=

Colours presented to the 91st Regiment, Canadian Active Militia, by the
Ladies of Hamilton, in Sept., 1904; presented by the 91st Regiment to
the 173rd Battalion in Oct., 1916. Will be deposited in a Scotch
cathedral.

=175th Battalion=

Colours presented by Messrs. J. H. Collier and J. Shield, of Medicine
Hat, Alberta, on Sept. 26th, 1916; deposited in Westminster Abbey.

=180th Battalion=

Colours presented by the Sportsmen’s Patriotic Association of Toronto,
Nov. 20th, 1916; deposited in the City Hall, Toronto.

=185th Battalion=

Colours made by Lady Borden, wife of the Prime Minister of Canada, and
presented by her to the Battalion on Sept. 25th, 1916.

=187th Battalion=

Colours presented by the I.O.D.E. of Innisfail, Alberta; presentation
made by A. E. Witchener, Esq., M.P.P., in June, 1916; deposited in
Westminster Abbey, March 3rd, 1916.

=191st Battalion=

Colours donated by Mr. Whitney, of Calgary, March, 1917; remained in
Calgary at the Unit Headquarters.

=194th Battalion=

Colours presented by the Hon. A. C. Rutherford, Ex-Premier of Alberta,
at Edmonton, on May 27th, 1916; deposited for safe keeping in the Bank
of Montreal, London Office.

=195th Battalion=

Colours manufactured by Messrs. Henry Berks & Son, of Winnipeg; are a
gift of Salisbury Plain’s Chapter of the I.O.D.E., Regina, Saskatchewan,
and were presented on June 5th, 1916, at Regina; deposited in Parliament
Buildings, Regina, Saskatchewan.

=198th Battalion=

Colours deposited in Canterbury Cathedral.

=202nd Battalion=

Colours deposited in Godalming Wesleyan Church.

=210th Battalion=

Colours made and presented by the Woman’s Auxiliary, March, 1917;
deposited in St. Andrew’s Church, Moose Jaw.

=211th Battalion=

Colours deposited in St. Paul’s Cathedral.

=212th Battalion=

Colours deposited in St Paul’s Cathedral.

=231st Battalion=

Colours presented by the Vancouver Women’s Auxiliary.

=237th Battalion=

Colours deposited in St. Paul’s Cathedral.

=238th Battalion=

Colours deposited on March 30th, 1917; in Potter’s Bar Church, near
London.

=Royal Canadian Regiment=[23]

Colours in Halifax.

=Eaton Machine Gun Battery=

Colours presented by the Ladies of Parkdale Chapter of the I.O.D.E. of
Toronto; they are with the Unit in France.

=4th Pioneer Battalion=

Colours deposited in Westminster Abbey.

-----

Footnote 23:

  The Royal Canadian Regiment is the only regular unit in the Canadian
  Forces. It was first raised in December, 1883, for the purpose of
  instructing the Canadian Militia, and was called the Infantry School
  Corps. Since then it has been known as the Royal Regiment of Canadian
  Infantry, then the Royal Canadian Regiment of Infantry, and later by
  its present title. In 1894 H.M. Queen Victoria gave her Imperial
  Cypher V.R.I. as a badge. The Regiment was increased during the South
  African War by the raising of a 2nd and 3rd Battalion; these were
  afterwards disbanded. In 1885 the Regiment took part in the
  suppression of the North West Rebellion under General Middleton at
  Batoche and Cut-Knife Creek. In 1896 it formed part of the Expedition
  sent up to police the New Yukon District, where it remained for two
  years. In 1899–1900, the 2nd Battalion fought in South Africa with the
  19th Brigade, doing particularly good service at Paardeburg. In 1905
  the establishment was increased, when the Imperial Troops handed over
  the garrisoning of the fortresses at Halifax and elsewhere to Canadian
  Troops. In 1914, on the outbreak of war, the Battalion relieved the
  2nd Bn. Lincolnshire Regiment at Bermuda, where it remained for eleven
  months. It landed in France in November, 1915, and took part in the
  battle of Ypres of June, 1916, Somme, September, 1916, and Vimy, 1917.
  It particularly distinguished itself on the Somme and Vimy. H.R.H. The
  Duke of Connaught is Colonel of the Regiment. In 1901, H.R.H. the Duke
  of Cornwall and York (now H.M. King George V.) presented Colours to
  the Regiment at Toronto. In 1904, H.E. Lord Minto, Governor-General of
  Canada, presented at Ottawa a special Banner given by H.M. King Edward
  VII. for service in South Africa.




                                 INDEX.

The Battle Honours given In Chapter IX. are not included in the Index,
as they appear in alphabetic order. Nor are the Canadian Regiments
(Appendix) given, as they are listed in numerical order.


 Act of Union, effect of, on colours, 24

 Albuhera, Colours at, 2

 Alma, Colours at, 1

 American War of Independence, effect of, on colours, 23

 Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, 108

 Artists’ Rifles, 114

 Australian Force, 119

 Ayreshire Yeomanry, 50


 Baluch Light Infantry, 118

 Barrosa Honour, 25

 Bedfordshire Regiment, 76

 Berkshire Regiment, 98

 Berkshire Yeomanry, 48, 50

 Black Watch, 93

 Border Regiment, 89

 Buffs, 2, 17, 20, 67


 Cameron Highlanders, 107

 Cameronians, 83

 Canadian Colours, 119

 Canadians, Royal, 109

 Carabiniers, 39

 Cheshire Regiment, 80

 Cheshire Yeomanry, 50

 City of London Rough Riders, 47, 51

 Civil Service Rifles, 112

 Coldstreams, 8, 10, 12, 25, 58–60, 71

 Connaught Rangers, 108

 Connaught’s Own Rajputs, Duke of, 116

 County of London Hussars, 51

 County of London Sharpshooters, 52


 Derbyshire Yeomanry, 48, 50

 Devonshire Regiment, 73

 Devon Yeomanry, 50

 Dorsetshire Regiment, 91

 Dorset Yeomanry, 51

 Dragoon Guards, 13, 15, 18, 29–31, 37–40, 43

 Dragoons, 9, 17, 18, 23, 29, 40–1, 43, 47

 Dublin Fusiliers, 110

 Duchess of York’s Regiment, 10

 Duke of Albany’s Regiment, 10

 Duke of Cambridge’s Hussars, 51

 Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry, 86

 Duke of Lancaster’s Own Yeomanry, 49, 51

 Duke of Wellington’s West, Riding Regiment, 86

 Durham Light Infantry, 102


 East Lancashire Regiment, 85

 East Surrey Regiment, 85

 East Yorkshire Regiment, 76

 Egypt Honour, 25

 Emsdorf Honour, 23

 Essex Regiment, 96

 Essex Yeomanry, 48


 Ferozepore Sikhs, 116

 Fife and Forfar Regiment, 48

 Finsbury Rifles, 112

 First Surrey Rifles, 113

 Foot Guards, 7, 10, 17, 28, 34, 54–63

 Fusiliers, 17, 70, 111

 Fusiliers, North British, 21


 Gibraltar Honour, 24

 Gloucestershire Hussars, 47

 Gloucestershire Regiment, 84

 Gordon Highlanders, 105

 Grenadier Guards, 8, 9, 54–8

 Grenadiers (Indian Army), 118

 Guernsey Militia, 123


 Hampshire Carabiniers, 48, 51

 Hampshire Regiment, 90

 Herts Yeomanry, 48

 Highland Light Infantry, 102

 Holland Regiment, 10

 Honourable Artillery Company, 121

 Horse Guards, 8, 9, 28, 29, 31, 37, 42

 Hussars, 43–5, 47


 Infantry Colours, 32, 64–114

 Inniskilling Dragoons, 41

 Inniskilling Fusiliers, 84

 Inniskilling Regiment, 14, 17, 21

 Irish Fusiliers, 107

 Irish Guards, 63

 Irish Regiment, Royal, 21, 77

 Irish Rifles, 107

 Isandlwana, Colours at, 1


 Jersey Militia, 122


 King’s Guards, 11

 King’s (Liverpool Regiment), 72

 King’s Own (Royal Lancashire Regiment), 68

 King’s Own (Yorkshire Light Infantry), 99


 Lanarkshire Yeomanry, 48, 51

 Lancashire Fusiliers, 78

 Lancashire Hussars, 51

 Lancers, 43–7

 Leicestershire Regiment, 76

 Leinster Regiment, 109

 Life Guards, 29, 37, 42

 Lincelles Honour, 25

 Lincolnshire Regiment, 14, 72

 London Irish Rifles, 113

 London Scottish, 112

 Lothians and Border Horse, 49, 52

 Loyal North Lancashire Regiment, 97


 Malta Militia, 120

 Manchester Regiment, 101

 Marine Light Infantry, 122

 Marine Regiment, 17

 Middlesex Regiment, 100

 Montgomeryshire Yeomanry, 49, 52

 Munster Fusiliers, 110


 Norfolk Regiment, 72

 Norfolk Yeomanry, 49

 Northamptonshire Regiment, 97

 Northamptonshire Yeomanry, 50

 North British Fusiliers, 21

 North Somerset Yeomanry, 47

 North Staffordshire Regiment, 101

 Northumberland Fusiliers, 69

 Northumberland Hussars, 52


 Oxfordshire and Bucks Light Infantry, 94

 Oxfordshire Yeomanry, 52


 Palamcottah Light Infantry, 117

 Peninsula Honour, 25

 Pioneers, 12th, 116;
   32nd, 61st, 64th, 117;
   121st, 128th, 118

 Poplar and Stepney Rifles, 113

 Post Office Rifles, 112

 Punjabis, 117, 118


 Queen’s Bays, 38

 Queen’s London Regiment, 113

 Queen’s Own, 99, 107

 Queen’s Regiment of Foot, 10

 Queen’s Royal Regiment, 20

 Queen’s (Royal West Surrey Regiment), 67

 Queen’s Westminster Rifles, 112

 Queen Victoria’s Rifles, 112


 Rajput Light Infantry, 116

 Rajputs, 116

 Rangers, 112

 Regiment, 3rd, 20;
   5th, 17;
   6th, 17;
   7th, 21;
   8th, 17, 21;
   12th, 24;
   18th, 21;
   21st, 21;
   23rd, 21;
   27th, 21;
   39th, 24;
   41st, 22;
   56th, 24;
   58th, 24

 Regimental Horse, 17

 Regulations affecting Colours etc., 3

 Rifle Brigade, 111

 Rifle Corps Regiment, 100

 Rough Riders, 47, 51

 Royal Regiment, 10, 17, 20

 Royal Scots (Lothian Regiment), 66


 Sandhurst Military College, 123

 Scots Fusiliers, 79

 Scots Greys, 40

 Scots Guards, 61–2

 Scottish Borderers, 83

 Scottish Horse, 49

 Seaforth Highlanders, 104

 Sherwood Foresters, 97

 Shropshire Light Infantry, 100

 Shropshire Yeomanry, 49, 52

 Somerset Light Infantry, 74

 South Lancashire Regiment, 92

 South Staffordshire Regiment, 91

 South Wales Borderers, 81

 Staffordshire Yeomanry, 52

 Suffolk Regiment, 73

 Suffolk Yeomanry, 52

 Sussex Regiment, 90

 Sussex Yeomanry, 49


 Talavera Honour, 25


 Wallajahbad Light Infantry, 118

 Warwickshire Regiment, 69

 Waterloo, Effect of, on Colours, 27

 Waterloo Honour, 25

 Wellington’s, Duke of, Regiment, 86

 Welsh Fusiliers, 21, 80

 Welsh Guards, 63

 Welsh Regiment, 92

 West India Regiment, 119

 West Kent Regiment, 99

 West Kent Yeomanry, 51

 Westminster Dragoons, 47, 50

 West Riding Regiment, 86

 West Yorkshire Regiment, 74

 Wiltshire Regiment, 100

 Wiltshire Yeomanry, 53

 Worcestershire Regiment, 84


 York and Lancaster Regiment, 102

 Yorkshire Dragoons, 53

 Yorkshire Hussars, 53

 Yorkshire Light Infantry, 99

 Yorkshire Regiment, 77

                      PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
           PIKE’S FINE ART PRESS, LTD., BRIGHTON AND LONDON.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          BY THE SAME AUTHOR.




                               MEDALS OF
                            OUR FIGHTING MEN


_Large crown 8vo, cloth, containing 16 full-page plates, 4 of them in
colour._

                                                    =Price 3s. 6d. net.=

This work is a popular account of the medals which have been awarded to
the Navy and Army since their introduction in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth. There are twelve chapters, which deal in turn with the
various classes of medals; fifty-nine illustrations from photographs,
depicting the most noteworthy specimens; and four coloured plates with
representations of sixty-one medal ribbons and miniatures of ten foreign
decorations. The letterpress not only describes the actual medals, but
gives data concerning the making of medals, the chief medallists, the
regulations which affect the granting of medals, the circumstances which
have influenced such awards, etc. Many Colonial medals and ribbons are
described, and there is an interesting appendix which deals with the
chief Foreign awards, with special reference to those of Our Allies.

        A. & C. BLACK, LTD., 4, 5 & 6 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W. 1.

                                 AGENTS:

 AMERICA     THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
               64 & 66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK

 AUSTRALASIA OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
               205 FLINDERS LANE, MELBOURNE

 CANADA      THE MACMILLAN COMPANY OF CANADA, LTD.
               ST. MARTIN’S HOUSE, 70 BOND STREET, TORONTO

 INDIA       MACMILLAN & COMPANY, LTD.
               MACMILLAN BUILDING, BOMBAY
               309 BOW BAZAAR STREET, CALCUTTA




                               MEDALS OF
                            OUR FIGHTING MEN


             By STANLEY G. JOHNSON, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.E.S.,

                Author of “Peeps at Postage Stamps,” &c.

 _Large crown 8vo, cloth, containing 16 full-page plates, 4 of them in
                                colour._

                           =Price= 3/6 =net.=

                         (_By post 3s. 10d._).

This work is a popular account of the medals which have been awarded to
the Navy and Army since their introduction in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth. There are twelve chapters, which deal, in turn, with the
various classes of medals; =fifty-nine illustrations from photographs=,
depicting the most noteworthy specimens; and =four coloured plates= with
representations of =sixty-one medal ribbons=. The letterpress not only
describes the actual medals but gives data concerning the making of
medals, the chief medallists, the regulations which affect the granting
of medals, the circumstances which have influenced such awards, etc.
Many Colonial medals and ribbons are described, and there is an
interesting appendix which deals with the chief Foreign awards, with
special reference to those issued to British officers and men by our
Allies.

                          SOME PRESS OPINIONS.

  “It is a first-class and very interesting book of reference.”—_The
  Guardian._

  “This is a timely book, well compiled and excellently illustrated.
  Civilians are frequently puzzled to identify ribbons and medals of
  even recent origin, and how few have any knowledge of the hundreds
  of awards for service and gallantry, modern and historical, which
  exist in connection with the two Services. By means of Mr. Johnson’s
  compact volume they can learn all that a reasonably well-informed
  reader need know about these matters.... Most people will be glad to
  possess the volume, and for older boys it will prove an excellent
  gift book.”—_The Bookman._

  “Altogether an invaluable _vade mecum_ on medals.”—_The Regiment._

       A. & C. BLACK, LTD., 4, 5 & 6, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W. 1.




                                PEEPS AT
                            THE BRITISH ARMY


                           By W. G. CLIFFORD,

                    Author of “The Ex-Soldier,” etc.

 _Containing 12 full-page illustrations in colour and 35 line blocks in
                      the text, large crown 8vo._

                           =Price= 2s. =net.=

“This little book ... tells in a wholly attractive manner the wonderful
story of the British Army from the very earliest days to the present
time.”—_United Service Magazine._

“Tells a wonderful story in bright and attractive style. It is
interesting and informative.”—_Western Mail._

“In bright and interesting style it tells the wonderful story of the
Army, touching on many points not usually dealt with in works of the
kind.... Easy to read, anecdotal and descriptive, the volume is just one
to place in the hands of those who wish to know more about the Army than
can be learned from general reading.”—_The Guardian._




                                PEEPS AT
                             THE ROYAL NAVY


                   By THE REV. JAMES BAIKIE, F.R.A.S.

   _Containing 12 full-page illustrations in colour, from drawings by
                    Norman Wilkinson, R.B.A., R.I._

                           =Price= 2s. =net.=

“This small book contains a wonderful amount of information concerning
the history of the Royal Navy, from the days of King Alfred the Great to
King George V., and is a book that would appeal to all lovers of naval
history. It is essentially for the young, but much could be learned by
adults from this interesting volume.”—_Naval Warrant Officers’ Journal._

“The book will be irresistible to boys who love sea stories, as many of
our established heroes figure in its pages.”—_The Schoolmistress._

                              PUBLISHED BY

       A. & C. BLACK, LTD., 4, 5 & 6, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Moved advertisement from the second page to between the index and
      the other ads.
 2. “Affghanistan” is the spelling used for the 1839 conflict.
      “Afghanistan” for later conflicts.
 3. Silently corrected typographical errors.
 4. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 5. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 6. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Flags of our Fighting Army, by 
Stanley C. Johnson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLAGS OF OUR FIGHTING ARMY ***

***** This file should be named 56830-0.txt or 56830-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/8/3/56830/

Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

